---
{"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/MATH/代数几何/Nodes/1.1 Some Algebra/","dgPassFrontmatter":true}
---


**Notations.**
- $k$ is an algebraically closed field
- $R$ is a commutative ring with identity

> [!NOTE]
> On the other hand, we assume known the following topics in algebra:
> 1) The essentials of field theory (Galois theory, separability, [[MATH/代数几何/Nodes/transcendence degree\|transcendence degree]]).
> 2) [[MATH/代数几何/Nodes/Localization of a Ring\|Localization of a Ring]], the behaviour of ideals in localization, the concept of a local ring.
> 3) Noetherian rings, and the [decomposition theorem of ideals](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Primary_decomposition) in these rings.
> 4) The concept of [[MATH/代数几何/Nodes/integral dependence\|integral dependence]], (cf., for example, Zariski-Samuel, vol. 1).


> [!definition]
> Define variety $V=\{z:z\in k^n,f_1(z)=\cdots=f_n(z)=0\}$ where $f_i\in k[x_1,\cdots,x_n]$. 
> 
> Define $R:=k[x_1,\cdots,x_n]/(f_1,\cdots,f_n)$. Then for any $\overline g\in R$, $z_1,z_2\in V$, $\overline g(z_1)=\overline g(z_2)$.


> [!theorem] Noetherian's Normalization Lemma
> Let $R$ be a finitely generated integral domain over $k$ with [[MATH/代数几何/Nodes/transcendence degree\|transcendence degree]] $\mathrm{tr}\deg_kR=n$. Then there exists $x_1,\cdots,x_n\in R$ algebraically independent over $k$ such that $R$ is integral over $k[x_1,\cdots,x_n]$, i.e. for any $y\in R$, there exists $g(t)\in k[x_1,\cdots,x_n][t]$ such that $g(t)$ is monic and $g(y)=0$.
{ #d13b03}


`\begin{proof}`
Since $R$ is finitely generated, we can assume that $R=k[y_1,\cdots,y_m]/I$. 

If $m=n$, then the images of $y_1,\cdots,y_m$ are algebraically independent and so $I=(0)$. Thus, $x_i:=y_i$ is what we desire. 

If $m>n$, by induction on $m$, we will find $R$ is integral over $S=k[z_1,\cdots,z_{m-1}]$. By induction, there exists $x_1,\cdots,x_n\in S$ such that $S$ is integral over $k[x_1,\cdots,x_n]$. Since $R$ is integral over $S$ and $S$ is integral over $k[x_1,\cdots,x_n]$, we have $R$ is integral over $k[x_1,\cdots,x_n]$ by [[MATH/代数几何/Nodes/transcendence degree#the transitivity of integral dependent\|the transitivity of integral dependent]]. 

Now we prove the part of "will find". Since $m>n$, the $m$ generators $y_1,\cdots,y_m$ cannot be algebraically independent and so there exists $0\neq f\in k[y_1,\cdots,y_m]$ such that $f(y_1,\cdots,y_m)=0$. Let $r_1,\cdots,r_m$ be positive integers, and let $z_2=y_2-y_1^{r_2}$, $z_3=y_3-y_1^{r_3}$, $\cdots$, $z_m=y_m-y_1^{r_m}\in R$. Then 

$$0=f(y_1,z_2+y_1^{r_2},\cdots,z_m+y_1^{r_m})=ay_1^N+(\mbox{terms of degree}<N)$$

and so there exists $g(t)\in k[z_2,\cdots,z_m](t)$ such that $g(y_1)=0$. Hence $y_1$ is integral over $k[z_2,\cdots,z_m]$. Note that $y_2=z_2+y_1^{r_2}\in k[z_2,\cdots,z_m][y_1]$, which yields $y_2$ is integral over $k[z_2,\cdots,z_m]$. Similarly, $y_3,\cdots,y_m$ are integral over $k[z_2,\cdots,z_m]$. Therefore, $R$ is integral over $k[z_2,\cdots,z_m]$. 
`\end{proof}`


**Geometric Meaning.** 

$$\require{AMScd} \begin{CD} R @>>> V_R\\ @A  A A @VV  V\\ k[x_1,\cdots,x_n] @>>> k^n \end{CD}$$


> [!lemma]
> Let $K$ be a field, and let $S\subseteq K$ be a ring. If $K$ is integral over $S$, then $S$ is a field.
{ #815254}


`\begin{proof}`
It suffices to show for any $0\neq a\in S$, there is $1/a\in S$. Since $1/a\in K$ and $K$ is integral over $S$, there exists $b_i\in S$ such that 

$$(1/a)^n+b_{n-1}(1/a)^{n-1}+\cdots + b_0=0$$

and it deduces that 

$$1/a+b_{n-1}+b_{n-2}a+\cdots+b_0a^{n-1}=0$$

and $b_{n-1}+\cdots +b_0a^{n-1}\in S$. Thus, $1/a\in S$. 
`\end{proof}`


> [!theorem] Going-Up
> Let $R$ be a ring, and let $S\subseteq R$ be a subring. If $R$ is integral over $S$, then for any prime ideal $p\subseteq S$, there exists prime ideal $q\subseteq R$ such that $p=q\cap S$. 

`\begin{proof}`
Let $M=S-p$ be a [multiplicative system](https://math.stackexchange.com/q/2789156/1445401). Let $S_M$ be the localization, i.e. $S_M=\{s/m:s\in S,m\in M\}$. Denote $R_M$ as the localization of $R$ w.r.t. $M$, then $R_M$ is integral over $S_M$. Let $p_M$ be the unique maximal ideal of $S_M$. 

If there exists a prime ideal $q_M\subseteq R_M$ such that $q_M\cap S_M=p_M$, then we have done by the following commutative diagram.

$$
\require{AMScd}
\begin{CD}
    R @>>> R_M\\
    @A  A A @AA j A\\
    S @>>> S_M
\end{CD}
$$

We claim that any maximal ideal $q_M\subseteq R_M$ satisfies that $q_M\cap S_M=p_M$. Since $q_M$ is maximal, $R_M/q_M$ is a field. Since $S/S\cap q_M$ can be seen as a subring of $R_M/q_M$, by [[MATH/代数几何/Nodes/1.1 Some Algebra#^815254\|#^815254]], $S_M/S_M\cap q_M$ is also a field. It deduces that $S_M\cap q_M$ is a maximal ideal and so $S_M\cap q_M=p_M$. 
`\end{proof}`


**Remark.** "Going down" is natural, as $S/q\cap S$ is a subring of $R/q$ and is an integral domain. Hence $q\cap S$ is a prime ideal. This theorem tells us the map $q\to q\cap S$ is surjective.

> [!theorem] Weak Nullstelle
> $M$ is a maximal ideal of $k[x_1,\cdots,x_n]$ iff $M=\{(x-a_1,\cdots,x_n-a_n):a_i\in k\}$. 
{ #6rh0cw}


`\begin{proof}`
Define 

$$\varphi:k[x_1,\cdots,x_n]/(x_1-a_1,\cdots,x_n-a_n)\to k, [f]\mapsto f(a_1,\cdots,a_n),$$

and we can prove that $\varphi$ is an isomorphism. Hence $k[x_1,\cdots,x_n]/(x_1-a_1,\cdots,x_n-a_n)$ is a field and so $(x_1-a_1,\cdots,x_n-a_n)$ is a maximal ideal.

Conversely, suppose $M\subseteq k[x_1,\cdots,x_n]$ is a maximal ideal. Then $R=k[x_1,\cdots,x_n]/M$ is a field, which is finitely generated. By [[MATH/代数几何/Nodes/1.1 Some Algebra#^d13b03\|#^d13b03]], we have $R\supseteq S$ and $S=k[y_1,\cdots,y_\ell]$ with algebraically independent $y_i$ such that $R$ is integral over $S$. By [[MATH/代数几何/Nodes/1.1 Some Algebra#^815254\|#^815254]], $S$ is a field and so $\ell=0$. Thus $R$ is integral over $k$ and so $R=k$ by $\overline k=k$. It deduces that $k[x_1,\cdots,x_n]/M=k$ and $k+M=k[x_1,\cdots,x_n]$. Assume that $x_i=m_i+a_i$, then $M\supseteq (x_1-a_1,\cdots,x_n-a_n)$. Recall that we have proved $(x_1-a_1,\cdots,x_n-a_n)$ is maximal, thus $M=(x_1-a_1,\cdots,x_n-a_n)$. 
`\end{proof}`

