---
{"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/MATH/代数几何/Nodes/1.5 Definition of Prevarieties and Morphisms/","dgPassFrontmatter":true}
---


> [!definition]
> Let $X$ be a topological space, and let $\underline{o}_X$ be the sheaf of $k$-valued function on $X$. Then $(X,\underline{o}_X)$ is a prevariety if
> - $X$ is connected;
> - there exists finite open covering $\{U_i\}_{i=1}^\ell$ such that $(U_i,\underline{o}_X|_{U_i})$ is an (irreducible) affine variety. 

> [!definition]
> $X$ is irreducible iff one of the followings hold:
> - if $X=Z_1\cup Z_2$ with $Z_i$ closed, then there exists $Z_i=X$;
> - for any open sets $U_1,U_2$, there is $U_1\cap U_2\neq \emptyset$;
> - any open set is dense.
{ #pcfcsm}


`\begin{proof}`
i)->ii) Assume that there exists open sets $U_1,U_2$ such that $U_1\cap U_2=\emptyset$, then we have $U_1^c\cup U_2^c=X$ and $U_i^c$ are closed, which is impossible. 

ii)->iii) If there exists open $U$ such that $\overline U\neq X$, then $\overline U^c$ is an open set and $U\cap \overline U^c=\emptyset$, leading to a contradiction.

iii)->i) If there exist closed set $Z_1$ and $Z_2$ such that $X=Z_1\cup Z_2$ and WLOG suppose $Z_1\neq X$, then $Z_1^c\subseteq Z_1\cup Z_2$ and so $Z_1^c\subseteq Z_2$. Since $Z_1^c$ is open, there is $\overline{Z_1^c}=X$. It deduces that $\overline{Z_2}=Z_2=X$. 
`\end{proof}`

Note that irreducible set is connected. 

> [!proposition]
> Prevariety $X$ is irreducible.

`\begin{proof}`
Define $\mathcal U=\{U\subseteq X:U\mbox{ is an affine open set}\}$. For nonempty open $V\subseteq X$, define $U_1=\cup_{U\in\mathcal U,U\cap V\neq \emptyset} U$ and $U_2=\cup_{U\in\mathcal U,U\cap V=\emptyset}U$. Then $X=U_1\cup U_2$. If there exists $x\in U_1\cap U_2$, then there is $W_1\subseteq U_1$ such that $W_1$ is affine and $x\in W_1$, as $W_f\subseteq W\cap U_1$(?). Similarly, we can find affine $W_2\subseteq U_2$ such that $x\in W_2$. 

Define $\mathcal U=\{U\subseteq X:U\mbox{ is an affine open set}\}$. For nonempty open $V\subseteq X$, define $U_1=\cup_{U\in\mathcal U,U\cap V\neq \emptyset} U$ and $U_2=\cup_{U\in\mathcal U,U\cap V=\emptyset}U$. Then $X=U_1\cup U_2$. If there exists $x\in U_1\cap U_2$, then there is $W_1\subseteq U_1$ such that $W_1$ is irreducible and $x\in W_1$. Similarly, we can find affine $W_2\subseteq U_2$ such that $x\in W_2$. Thus $W_1\cap W_2\neq \emptyset$. Since $W_1\cap W_2$ is an open set of $W_1$, we have $(W_1\cap W_2)\cap (W_1\cap V)\neq \emptyset$. Then $W_2\cap V\neq\emptyset$, contradiction. Therefore, $X=U_1\sqcup U_2$. By connectedness of $X$, $X=U_1$ and $U_2=\emptyset$. Hence, for any open set $U\in\mathcal U$, $U\cap V\neq \emptyset$ and so $X$ is irreducible.
`\end{proof}`


> [!proposition]
> Let $X$ be a prevariety. The closed subsets are DCC.
{ #uia9mm}


`\begin{proof}`
For a chain of closed set $Z_1\supseteq\cdots\supseteq Z_k\supseteq\cdots$, since $X=\cup_{i=1}^\ell U_i$ with $U_i$ irreducible, there is $\{U_i\cap Z_j\}$ DCC and so for $\{Z_i\}$.
`\end{proof}`


> [!proposition]
> Let $X$ be a Noetherian topological space, i.e., closed sets satisfy DCC. For any closed set $Z$, there exists unique decomposition $Z=\cup_{i=1}^\ell Z_i$ such that $Z_i$ is irreducible, and $Z_i$ are called irreducible component. 

`\begin{proof}`
Existence: assume $Z$ is the minimal element such that the above property does not hold. Then $Z$ is not irreducible, and $Z=Z_1\cup Z_2$ where closed $Z_i\subsetneq Z$. It deduces that $Z_i=\cup_j Y_j$ and $Z_j=\cup_jW_j$ can be decomposed as union of finitely many irreducible closed sets. So the above property also holds for $Z$, contradiction. 

Uniqueness: let $\cup_{j\in J}Z_j=\cup_{i\in I}W_i=Z$ be distinct decompositions, then $W_i=\cup_{j\in J}(W_i\cap Z_j)$. Since $W_i$ is irreducible, there exists $j$ such that $W_i=W_i\cap Z_j$ and so $W_i\subseteq Z_j$. Conversely $Z_j\subseteq W_{i'}$ for some $i'$ and $i=i'$. Therefore, the decomposition is unique.
`\end{proof}`


> [!definition] functional field
> Let $X$ be a prevariety. The *functional field* $k(X)$ is the generic stalk of $\underline{o}_X$, i.e. $k(X)=\underset{\text{all open }U\subseteq X}{\underset{\rightarrow}{\lim }} {\underline{o}_X} (U)$. 
> 
> The elements of $k(X)$ are called *rational functions* on $X$, although they are only functions on open dense subsets of $X$.

**Fact.** For affine set $V\subseteq X$, define $\Gamma(V,\underline{o}_X)=R$ and it is an integral domain and there is $R\hookrightarrow k(X)$. **We claim that $\mathrm{Frac}(R)=k(X)$.** For any $f\in \mathrm{Frac}(R)$, $f=g/h$ for some $g,h\in R$ with $h\neq 0$. Then $f\in \underline{o}_X(U)$ for an open dense $U\subseteq X$ and so $\mathrm{Frac}(R)\subseteq k(X)$. For any $f\in k(X)$, $f$ is defined over an open dense subset of $X$. Since $X$ is a prevariety, we may assume that $f_i=a_i/b_i$ over $U_i$ where$\{U_i\}$ is a finite open cover of $X$. Then there exists $f\in \underline{o}_X(X)$ such that $f|_{U_i}=f_i$ and then $f\in \mathrm{Frac}(R)$. Now we prove the claim. 

Let $Y \subseteq X$ be an irreducible closed subset of $X$, and let

$$\underline{o}_{Y, X}=\underset{\substack{\text { open sets } U \\\text{ such that } U\cap Y \neq \emptyset}}{\underset{\rightarrow}{\lim }}  \underline{o}_X(U).$$

Note that $\underline{o}_{X,X}=k(X)$ and $\underline{o}_{\{x_0\},X}=\underline{o}_{x_0}$ (see [[MATH/代数几何/Nodes/1.4 Sheaves & Affine Varieties#^o2zkc6\|here]]), so $\underline{o}_{Y,X}$ is intermediate between the $\underset{\longrightarrow}{\lim }$ that leads to $\underline{o}_x$ and that which leads to $k(X)$. 

For a given affine set $V\subseteq X$ with $V\cap Y\neq \emptyset$, define $\Gamma(V,\underline{o}_V)=R$. Then $V\cap Y$ is closed in $V$ and $V\cap Y=V(P)$ for some prime ideal $P\subseteq R$. As $Y$ is irreducible, $V\cap Y$ is also irreducible and $\Gamma(V\cap Y,\underline{o}_{V\cap Y})=R/p$. Note that 

$$\underline{o}_{Y, X}=\underset{\substack{\text { open sets } U \\\text{ such that } U\cap Y \neq \emptyset}}{\underset{\rightarrow}{\lim }}  \underline{o}_X(U)=\underset{\substack{(U\cap Y)\cap(V\cap Y)\neq \emptyset}}{\underset{\rightarrow}{\lim }}  \underline{o}_X(U\cap V).$$

Since $U\cap V\cap Y\neq \emptyset$, there exists $f$ such that $f\notin P$ and $V_f\subseteq U$ as $\{V_f\}$ is a set of topological basis. Then

$$\underline{o}_{Y, X}=\underset{\substack{\text { open sets } U \\\text{ such that } U\cap Y \neq \emptyset}}{\underset{\rightarrow}{\lim }}  \underline{o}_X(U)=\underset{\substack{(U\cap Y)\cap(V\cap Y)\neq \emptyset}}{\underset{\rightarrow}{\lim }}  \underline{o}_X(U\cap V)=\underset{f\notin P}{\underset{\rightarrow}{\lim }}  \underline{o}_X(V_f)=\underset{f\notin P}{\underset{\rightarrow}{\lim }}  R_f=R_P$$

by [[MATH/代数几何/Nodes/1.4 Sheaves & Affine Varieties#^9d743b\|1.4 Sheaves & Affine Varieties#^9d743b]].

> [!proposition]
> Let $(X,\underline{o}_X)$ be a prevariety. For any open set $U\subseteq X$, $(U,\underline{o}_X|_U)$ is also a prevariety.
{ #695715}


`\begin{proof}`
Note that $U$ is connected. Otherwise $U=U_1\sqcup U_2$ with open $U_i$. Then $X$ is irreducible yields that $U_1\cap U_2\neq \emptyset$, contradiction. 

Assume that $\{U_i\}_{i=1}^\ell$ is a finite open cover of $X$. For any $x\in U$, there exists $i\in\{1,\cdots,\ell\}$ such that $x\in U_i$. Then we can find $f$ such that $(U_i)_f\subseteq U$. Notice that $(U_i,\underline{o}_X|_{U_i})$ is affine, and then $((U_i)_f,\underline{o}_X|_{(U_i)_f})$ is affine. Hence, $U$ has an open cover $U=\cup_{j\in J} V_j$ with $(V_i,\underline{o}_X|_{V_i})$ affine. 

Then $U=\cup_{\text{finite}}V_i$, as we cannot have strictly increasing sequence of open sets in $X$ by [[MATH/代数几何/Nodes/1.5 Definition of Prevarieties and Morphisms#^uia9mm\|#^uia9mm]]. 
`\end{proof}`



> [!proposition]
> Now let $Y$ be a closed irreducible subset of a prevariety $X$. The sheaf $\underline{o}_X$ induces a sheaf $\underline{o}_Y$ on $Y$ as follows: If $V$ is open in $Y$, define
> 
> $$\underline{o}_Y(V)=\left\{\begin{array}{l|l}k \text {-valued functions } f\text{ on }V &\begin{array}{l}\forall x \in V, \exists \text { a neighbourhood } U \text { of } x \text { in } X \\ \text { and a function } F \in \underline{o}_X(U) \text { such that } \\ f=\text{restriction to }U\cap V \text { of } F\end{array}\end{array}\right\}.$$
> 
> Then the pair $\left(Y, \underline{o}_Y\right)$ is a prevariety.
{ #ee0fb8}


`\begin{proof}`
- $Y$ connected
- $X=\cup_{\text{finite}}U_i$ with $U_i$ affine. There is $Y=\cup_{\text {finite}}U_i\cap Y$ where $(U_i\cap Y,\underline{o}_Y|_{U_i\cap Y})\simeq (U_i\cap Y,\underline{o}_{U_i\cap Y})$
`\end{proof}`


Combining [[MATH/代数几何/Nodes/1.5 Definition of Prevarieties and Morphisms#^695715\|#^695715]] and [[MATH/代数几何/Nodes/1.5 Definition of Prevarieties and Morphisms#^ee0fb8\|#^ee0fb8]] we can even give a prevariety structure to every locally closed subset of a prevariety $X$: For any $Z\subseteq X$ irreducible, $U\subseteq X$ open, then $Z\cap U\subseteq U$ (locally closed subset) admits a prevariety structure.

****
例子还没整理
**Example.** $U\simeq V\simeq \mathbb{A}^1$ and $u\in U,v\in V$. There is $U_u=V_v=\mathbb{A}^1\setminus\{0\}$.

$\Gamma(U)=k[u]$ and $\Gamma(U_u)=k[u,1/u]$
$\Gamma(V)=k[v]$ and $\Gamma(U_uv)=k[v,1/v]$

Define $\psi:U_u\to V_v,u\mapsto v=1/u$ and $\Gamma(V_v)\to \Gamma(U_u),v\mapsto 1/u,1/v\mapsto u$

Define $\mathbb P=U\cup_\psi V$. Define $o_\mathbb{P}(\Omega)=\cap_{x\in \Omega}\underline{o}_x$. Then $(\mathbb{P},o_\mathbb{P}):=\mathbb{P}^1$ is a prevariety, as $P=U\cup V$ with $(U,o_\mathbb{P}|_U)\simeq (U,o_U)$ and $(V,o_\mathbb{P}|_V)\simeq (V,o_V)$.

On the other hand, define $U_u\stackrel{\theta}{\to}V_v,u\mapsto v$ and define $W=U\cup_\theta V$. Then $(W,\underline{o}_W)$ is a prevariety with $\underline{o}_W(U)=\cap_{x\in W}\underline{o}_X$, because $W=U\cup V$ where $(U,o_W|_U)=(U,o_U)$ and $(V,o_W|_V)=(V,o_V)$. (It is not a variety, as it is not "Hausdorff", see [[Pasted image 20250320145232.png|here]]. )
******

# Define of Projective Varieties

Let $P\subseteq k[x_0,\cdots,x_n]$ be a homogeneous prime ideal. Define $X=V(P)\subseteq \mathbb{P}_n(k)$ and $R=k[x_0,\cdots,x_n]/P$. We aim to make $X$ into a prevariety. 

Define graded integral domain $R=\oplus_{i=0}^\infty R_i$ with 

$$R_i=\{\overline f:\deg f=i,f\mbox{ is a homogeneous polynomial}\}.$$

Define $k(X)=\{f/g:f,g\mbox{ are homogeneous}, \deg f=\deg g\}$. Note that for $x_0\in X$ and $g\in R_n$, $g(x_0)\neq 0$ does not depend on the choice of representative of $x$. Hence we can define $X_g=\{x\in X:g(x)\neq 0\}$ for $g\in R_n$ and then define a ring 

$$\underline{o}_{x_0}=\{f/g\in K(x):g(x_0)\neq 0\}.$$ 

The set $m_{x_0}=\{f/g\in K(x):f(x_0)=0, g(x_0)\neq 0\}$ is the unique maximal ideal, as any element not in $m_{x_0}$ is invertible in $\underline{o}_{x_0}$. Hence, $(\underline{o}_{X_0}, m_{x_0})$ is a local ring.

We now define a sheaf $\underline{o}_X$ on $X$ by 

$$\underline{o}_X(U)=\cap_{x\in U}\underline{o}_x,\text{ for all open }U\subseteq X.$$

Remark that $\mathbb{P}_{x_j}=\{x:x_j\neq 0\}\simeq \mathbb{A}^n$. We claim that $(X\cap \mathbb{P}_n(k)_{x_j},\underline{o}_X|_{X\cap \mathbb{P}_{x_j}})$ is an affine variety. Here we only check the case of $j=0$.

For every homogeneous polynomial $F \in P$, $F':=F / x_0^{\operatorname{deg} F}$ is a polynomial in the variables $x_1/x_0,\cdots,x_n/x_0$. Let $P^{\prime} \subset k\left[y_1,\cdots,y_n\right]$ be the ideal generated by all these $F^{\prime}$. We can map $k\left[y_1, \ldots, y_n\right]$ into a subring of $k(X)$ by taking $y_i$ to the function given by $x_i / x_0$; the kernel of this map is exactly $P^{\prime}$, so $P^{\prime}$ is prime. Note that we get an isomorphism 

$$\varphi: X \cap \mathbb{P}_n(k)_{X_n} \to X^{\prime}=V\left(P^{\prime}\right) \subset k^n,x\mapsto (x_1/x_0,\cdots,x_n/x_0)$$

and $\varphi$ is actually a homeomorphism (cf. Problem at end of $\S3$).

Now for $x \in X \cap \mathbb{P}_n(k)_{x_0}$, the local ring $\underline{o}_x$ is the set of all elements of $k(X)$ having the form $f / g$ for $f, g$ in some $R_m, g(x) \neq 0$. Define $R'=k[y_1,\cdots,y_n]/P'$.

If $k(X')=\mathrm{Frac}(R')$, then $\underline{o}_{\varphi(x)}$ is the set of all elements in $k\left(X^{\prime}\right)$ having the form $F / G$ for $F, G \in R^{\prime}, G(\varphi(x)) \neq 0$. Then 

$$\theta:R'\to K(x),y_i\mapsto x_i/x_0$$

extends to an isomorphism $k(X')\simeq k(X)$. Moreover, $\theta$ takes $\underline{o}_{\varphi(x)}$ precisely onto $\underline{o}_x$. 
- First of all it clearly maps $\underline{o}_{\varphi x}$ into $\underline{o}_x$; and 
- if $f, g \in R_m, g(x) \neq 0$, then $f / g=f / X_0^m \big/ g / X_0^m$ in $k(X)$ and $f / X_0^m, g / X_0^m$ come from $F, G$ in $R^{\prime}$ with $G(\varphi(x)) \neq 0$. 
	- Thus the local rings correspond; 
	- since the sheaves were defined by intersecting local rings, they also correspond, and $X \cap \mathbb{P}_n(k)_{X_0}$ is indeed an affine variety.


> [!definition]
> Let $X$ and $Y$ be prevarieties. A map $f: X \rightarrow Y$ is a morphism if $f$ is continuous and, for all open sets $V$ in $Y$,
> 
> $$g \in \Gamma\left(V, \underline{o}_Y\right) \Longrightarrow g \cdot f \in \Gamma\left(f^{-1} V, \underline{o}_X\right) .$$
>
{ #r0ujqi}


**Remark.** The definition is compatible with [[MATH/代数几何/Nodes/1.3 Morphisms#^4524hh\|1.3 Morphisms#^4524hh]], see [[MATH/代数几何/Nodes/HW4#^6iefsw\|here]]. 

> [!proposition]
> Let $f: X \rightarrow Y$ be any map. Let $\left(V_i\right)$ be a collection of open affine subsets covering $Y$. Suppose that $\left\{U_i\right\}$ is an open covering of $X$ such that
> - $f\left(U_i\right) \subset V_i$  
> - $f^*$ maps $\Gamma\left(V_i, \underline{o}_Y\right)$ into $\Gamma\left(U_i, \underline{o}_X\right)$. 
> 
> Then $f$ is a morphism.

`\begin{proof}`
See [[Mumford - 1999 - The red book of varieties and schemes  includes t.pdf#page=42&selection=150,0,151,0|Mumford, page 42]]. 
`\end{proof}`



