---
{"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/MATH/代数几何/Nodes/1.7 Dimensions/","dgPassFrontmatter":true}
---


> [!definition]
> Let $X$ be a variety. Define $\dim X=\mathrm{tr}.\deg_kk(X)=\mathrm{tr}.\deg_k\mathrm{Frac}(R)$, where $\Gamma(U)=R$ for some affine open set $U\subseteq X$. 

**Remark.** 
- For nonempty open set $U\subseteq X$, $k(X)=k(U)$ as $\underline{o}_X(W)\to \underline{o}_X(W\cap U)$ and $W\cap U\neq \emptyset$. 
- If $U$ is affine, $\Gamma(U)=R$ and $k(U)=\mathrm{Frac}(R)$

**Remark.** Since $k$ is algebraically closed, the following are equivalent:
- i) $\operatorname{dim} X=0$
- ii) $k(X)=k$
- iii) $X$ is a point.

- [ ] pf: 14:45

> [!proposition]
> Let $Y$ be a proper closed subvariety of $X$. Then $\operatorname{dim} Y<\operatorname{dim} X$.

`\begin{proof}`
We need to prove the following lemma. 

> [!lemma]
> Let $R$ be an integral domain over $k, P \subset R$ a prime. Then $\operatorname{tr} . \mathrm{deg} _k R \geqslant \operatorname{tr} . \mathrm{deg} _k R/p$, with equality only if $P=\{0\}$ or both sides are $\infty$. 

`\begin{proof}`
Let $\mathrm{tr}\deg_k R=n<\infty$, and let $P\neq \{0\}$. If the statement does not hold. Then there exist $x_1,\cdots,x_n\in R$ such that $\overline x_1,\cdots,\overline x_n\in R/p$ are algebraically independent. Let $q\in P\setminus\{0\}$. Then $q,x_1,\cdots,x_n$ are algebraically dependent. $T(y,x_1,\cdots,x_n)\neq 0$ is a polynomial such that $T(q,x_1,\cdots,x_n)=0$. We can assume that $y\not\mid T(y,x_1,\cdots,x_n)$. (If $T=y^nT_1\cdots T_\ell$, then $T(q,\cdots)=q^nT_1\cdots T_\ell$ with $q^n\neq 0$. So we can replace $T$ by $T_i$ for some $i$.)

Note that 

$$0=T(\overline q,\overline x_1,\cdots,\overline x_n)=T(0,\overline x_1,\cdots,\overline x_n)$$

and $T(0,x_1,\cdots,x_n)\neq 0$. As $T(0,\overline x_1,\cdots,\overline x_n)=0$, they are algebraically dependent, which is a contradiction. 
`\end{proof}`


Now we prove the proposition. 

For $y_0\in Y$, define $y_0\in U\subseteq X$ for affine open set $U$. Since $Y\cap U\neq \emptyset$, $\dim X=\dim U$ and $\dim Y=\dim Y\cap U$. 

Note that $\Gamma(U)=R$ and $\Gamma(Y\cap U)=R/p$ with prime ideal $p\subseteq R$, then $Y\neq X$ yields $p\neq \{0\}$ and $\dim Y<\dim X$.
`\end{proof}`


> [!theorem]
> Let $X$ be an variety, and let $U\subseteq X$ be an open set. Take $0\neq g\in\Gamma(U,\underline{o}_X)$ and $Z$ is an irreducible component of $\{z\in U:g(x)=0\}\neq \emptyset$. Then $\dim Z=\dim X-1$. 

`\begin{proof}`
There exists open affine $U_0\subseteq X$ such that $U_0\cap Z\neq \emptyset$. Define $\Gamma(U_0)=R$ with $g=g|_{U_0}\in R$. $U_0\cap Z$ is an irreducible component of $\{z\in U_0:g(z)=0\}$. As $\dim Z=\dim (U_0\cap Z)$, it suffices to show $\dim (U_0\cap Z)=\dim U_0-1$. 

> [!theorem] Krull's Principal ideal theorem (PIT)
> Define
> - $R$ a finitely generated integral domain over $k$
> - $f\in R$, $f\neq 0$ and $f\notin R^*$
> - $p$ is a minimal prime ideal containing $f$.
> 
> then $\mathrm{tr}.\deg_kR/p=\mathrm{tr}.\deg_kR-1$. 

In $U_0$, $\sqrt{ (f)}=P_1^{n_1}\cap\cdots\cap P_\ell^{n_\ell}$ with $f\in P_j$ and $f$ is a minimal prime ideal. Each irreducible component $Z$ corresponds $P_j$ for some $j$ and then $\Gamma(Z)=R/P_j$ has $\mathrm{tr}.\deg_k R/P_j=\mathrm{tr}.\deg_k R-1$. 

> [!definition]
> Let $f:X\to Y$ be a morphism between affine varieties, and let $f^*:S\to R$ with $R=\Gamma(X)$ and $S=\Gamma(Y)$. Then $f$ is a finite morphism if $R$ is a finitely generated $f^*(S)$-module. Note that $R$ is a finitely generated $f^*(S)$-module iff $R$ is a finitely generated $S$-module iff $R$ is integral dependent on $f^*(S)$, that is, for any $r\in R$, there exists a monic polynomial $q(x)\in f^*(S)[x]$ such that $q(r)=0$. 


**Remark.** 第二个等价不是很显然

> [!proposition]
> Let $f:X\to Y$ be a finite morphism. 
> - $f$ is a closed map, i.e., $Z\subseteq X$ closed yields $f(Z)\subseteq Y$ closed;
> - for any $y\in Y$, $f^{-1}(y)$ is a finite set (quasi-finite);
> - $f$ is surjective iff $f^*:\Gamma(Y)\to \Gamma(X)$ is injective. 

**Counterexample.** $\mathbb{A}^1\setminus\{0\}\hookrightarrow \mathbb{A}^1$ satisfies ii) but not i). It is not a finite morphism. 

