---
{"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/MATH/抽象代数II/Nodes/1.2 Free Abelian Group/","dgPassFrontmatter":true}
---


In this section, we write abelian group additively.

> [!definition]
> Let $F$ be an abelian group. For a subset $X\subseteq F$, define $\left\langle X\right\rangle=\{n_1x_1+\cdots+n_tx_t:n_i\in \mathbb{Z},x_i\in X\}$. We say $X$ is a basis if
> - $\left\langle X\right\rangle=F$, and
> - if $\sum_{i=1}^tn_ix_i=0$ for some $n_i\in \mathbb{Z}$ and $x_i\in X$, then $n_i=0$ for all $i$.
>   
> We say $F$ is a free abelian group if it has a basis.

> [!definition]
> Let $\{G_i\}_{i\in I}$ be a family of groups. Define
> - *(external) direct product* as $\Pi_{i\in I}G_i:=\{(a_i)_{i\in I}:a_i\in G_i\}$.
> - *(external) weak direct product* as $\Pi'_{i\in I}G_i:=\{(a_i)_{i\in I}:a_i\in G_i,a_i=1\mbox{ for almost all }i\}$
> - Suppose $G_i$ are additive abelian groups, define *(external) direct sum* as $\oplus_{i\in I}G_i:=\Pi'_{i\in I}G_i$.

**Remark.** The definition of (iii) is different from Hungerford.

> [!definition]
> Let $\{N_i:i\in I\}$ where $N_i\lhd G$. If
> - $\left\langle \cup_{i\in I}N_i\right\rangle=G$, and 
> - $\forall k\in I$, $N_k\cap\left\langle \cup_{i\neq k}N_i\right\rangle=\{e_G\}$,
> 
> then we say $G$ is the *internal weak direct product* of $N_i$, or internal direct sum of $N_i$ (if written additively). Conversely, $G\simeq\Pi'_{i\in I}N_i$.


> [!theorem]
> Let $F$ be an abelian group. TFAE:
> - $F$ has a non-empty basis $X$.
> - $F$ is the (internal) direct sum of a family of infinite cyclic groups.
> - $F\simeq\oplus_{i\in I}\mathbb{Z}$ is an (external) direct sum of copies of $(\mathbb{Z},+)$.
{ #2408e8}


`\begin{proof}`
i) -> ii). For any $x\in X$, $nx=0$ iff $n=0$. Thus $\left\langle x\right\rangle$ is an infinite cyclic subgroup. Claim: $F$ is the internal direct sum of $\left\langle x\right\rangle$ for all $x\in X$. By definition, it suffices to check that $\left\langle x\right\rangle\cap\left\langle X\setminus\{x\}\right\rangle=\{0\}$. Indeed, if $nx=\sum_{x_i\neq x} n_ix_i$, then $n=0$ and $n_i=0$. So we finish the proof.

ii) -> iii). Easy.

iii) -> i). Easy.
`\end{proof}`

> [!theorem]
> Let $F$ be a finite generated abelian group. Then any two bases of $F$ have the same cardinality.

`\begin{proof}`
By [[MATH/抽象代数II/Nodes/1.2 Free Abelian Group#^2408e8\|#^2408e8]], suppose $F\simeq\oplus_{i\in I}\mathbb{Z}$ and $F\simeq\oplus_{j\in J}\mathbb{Z}$. Then $F/2F\simeq\oplus_{i\in I}\mathbb{Z}/2\mathbb{Z}$ and $F/2F\simeq\oplus_{j\in J}\mathbb{Z}/2\mathbb{Z}$. Then $|F/2F|=2^{|I|}=2^{|J|}$. Thus $|I|=|J|$.
`\end{proof}`

> [!definition]
> The *rank* of finite generated abelian group $F$ is the cardinality of basis, denoted by $\mathrm{rk}F$ or $\mathrm{rk}_\mathbb{Z}F$.

> [!corollary]
> Let $F_1,F_2$ be two finite generated abelian group. Then $F_1\simeq F_2$ iff $\mathrm{rk}F_1=\mathrm{rk}F_2$.
{ #14f54e}


> [!theorem]
> Let $G$ be an abelian group. Then it is the homomorphic image of a free abelian group of rank $|X|$, where $X$ is a set of generators of $G$.
{ #d4cf25}


`\begin{proof}`
Let $F:=\oplus_{x\in X}\mathbb{Z}$. Define $f:F\to G,(n_xx)_{x\in X}\mapsto \sum_{x\in X}n_xx$. Then $G=\mathrm{Im} f$.
`\end{proof}`

> [!theorem]
> Let $M$ be a finite generated free abelian group with $\mathrm{rk}_\mathbb{Z} M=n$. Let $M'<M$ nonzero. Then
> - $M'$ is also a free abelian group with $\mathrm{rk} M'=q\leqslant n$.
> - There exists some basis $(e_1,\cdots,e_n)$ of $M$ and $a_1,\cdots,a_q\in \mathbb{Z}^+$ such that $a_1\mid a_2\mid\cdots\mid a_q$ such that $(a_1e_1,\cdots,a_qe_q)$ is a basis of $M'$.
{ #93020f}


Before the proof, we firstly give the following examples.

**Examples.** 
- $M=\mathbb{Z}$ and $M'=2\mathbb{Z}$. Then $e_1=1$ and $a_1=2$.
- $M=\mathbb{Z}e_1\oplus \mathbb{Z}e_2$ and $M'=\left\langle 2e_1+3e_2\right\rangle$. If we let $f_1=2e_1+3e_2$ and $f_2=e_1+2e_2$, then $(f_1,f_2)$ is a basis of $M$ and $1\cdot f_1$ is a basis of $M'$ with $a_1=1$.
- $M=\mathbb{Z}{e_1}\oplus\mathbb{Z}e_2$ and $M'=\left\langle 3e_1,4e_2\right\rangle$. Let $f_1=3e_1+4e_2$ and $f_2=2e_1+3e_2$. Then $M'=\left\langle f_1,12f_2\right\rangle$.

> [!example] How to compute $a_1,\cdots,a_q$?
> Let $M=\mathbb{Z}{e_1}\oplus\mathbb{Z}e_2$ and $M'=\left\langle 2e_1+3e_2,4e_1+12e_2\right\rangle$. $M'$ can be written as $\left[ \begin{matrix} 2 & 3 \\ 4 & 12  \end{matrix} \right]\left[ \begin{matrix} e_1  \\ e_2  \end{matrix} \right]$. Note that
> 
> $$\begin{aligned}
> &\left[ \begin{matrix} 2 & 3 \\ 4 & 12  \end{matrix} \right]\left[ \begin{matrix} e_1  \\ e_2  \end{matrix} \right]\\
> =&\left[ \begin{matrix} 1 & 0 \\ 2 & 1  \end{matrix} \right]\left[ \begin{matrix} 2 & 3 \\ 0 & 6  \end{matrix} \right]\left[ \begin{matrix} e_1 \\ e_2  \end{matrix} \right] \\
> =& \left[ \begin{matrix} 1 & 0 \\ 2 & 1  \end{matrix} \right] \left[ \begin{matrix} 1 & 0 \\ 6 & 1  \end{matrix} \right] \left[ \begin{matrix} 0 & 1\\1 & 0  \end{matrix} \right] \left[ \begin{matrix} -12 & 0 \\ 0 & 1  \end{matrix} \right] \left[ \begin{matrix} 1 & 1 \\ 2 & 3  \end{matrix} \right]\left[ \begin{matrix} e_1 \\ e_2 \end{matrix} \right]\\
> =& M \left[ \begin{matrix} -12 & 0 \\ 0 & 1  \end{matrix} \right] \left[ \begin{matrix} e_1+e_2\\ 2e_1+3e_2  \end{matrix} \right].
> \end{aligned}$$
> 
> where $M$ is a invertible matrix. So $M'=\left\langle f_1,12 f_2\right\rangle$ where $f_1=2e_1+3e_2$ and $f_2=e_1+e_2$. 

Now we prove [[MATH/抽象代数II/Nodes/1.2 Free Abelian Group#^93020f\|#^93020f]] and we start with a lemma.

> [!lemma]
> Let $f:M\to N$ be an epimorphism of abelian groups, and suppose $N$ is a finite generated free abelian group. Then $M\simeq N\oplus \ker f$ as abelian groups.
{ #f38221}


`\begin{proof}`
Let $\{e_1,\cdots,e_n\}$ be a basis of $N$. Suppose $x_i\in M$ such that $f(x_i)=e_i$. Define a map $g:M\to N\oplus\ker f$ where for $x\in M$, suppose $f(x)=\sum_{i=1}^n a_ie_i$, $a_i\in \mathbb{Z}$, then let $g(x)=(f(x),x-\sum_{i=1}^na_ix_i)\in N\oplus\ker f$. Then it suffices to check $g$ is an isomorphism.

- Homomorphism: It is easy to verify $g$ is a homomorphism. 
- Injective: If $f(x)=x-\sum_{i=1}^na_ix_i=0$, then $\sum a_ie_i=0$, $a_i\equiv 0$ and so $x=0$. Thus $g$ is injective.
- Surjective: Given $(\alpha, \beta)\in N\oplus\ker f$, then $\alpha=\sum_{i=1}^n a_ie_i$. Let $x=\sum_{i=1}^na_ix_i+\beta\in M$. Then $g(x)=(\alpha,\beta)$.
`\end{proof}`

**Remark.** $0\to\ker f\to M\stackrel{f}\to N\to 0$ is a short exact sequence. If $N$ is free, then there exists $s:N\to M$ such that $f\circ s=\mathrm{id}_N$.

`\begin{proof}` *It is a proof of [[MATH/抽象代数II/Nodes/1.2 Free Abelian Group#^93020f\|#^93020f]], (i)*. 

(i) By induction on $n$. When $n=1$, then $M=\mathbb{Z}e>M'\neq 0$. Elements in $M$ are of form $ae$ for some $a\in \mathbb{Z}$. Let $a_1=\min\{a\in \mathbb{Z}:ae\in M'\}$. Claim that $M'=\left\langle a_1e\right\rangle$. Indeed, $\left\langle a_1e\right\rangle\subseteq M'$. If it is not equal, then there exists $ae\in M'$ and $ae\notin\left\langle a_1e\right\rangle$. WLOG $a>0$. Since $ae\notin\left\langle a_1e\right\rangle$, we have that $a_1\not\mid a$ and $(a_1,a)=b<a_1$. Then by Bezout's theorem there exists $x,y\in \mathbb{Z}$ such that $ax+a_1y=b$, and so $x(ae)+y(a_1e)=be\in M'$. But $0<b<a_1$, which contradicts with minimality of $a_1$.

Now suppose (i) holds when $\mathrm{rk} M\leqslant n$. Now consider $\pi:M=\mathbb{Z}\oplus \mathbb{Z}^n\twoheadrightarrow \mathbb{Z}^n,(a,b)\mapsto b$. Let $N=\pi(M')<\mathbb{Z}^n$. By induction hypothesis, $N$ is free with $\mathrm{rk}N\leqslant n$. Also we know $\pi$ induces a map $\pi|_{M'}:M'\twoheadrightarrow N$. By [[MATH/抽象代数II/Nodes/1.2 Free Abelian Group#^f38221\|#^f38221]], $M'\simeq N\oplus\ker(\pi|_M')$. Note that $\ker\pi=\mathbb{Z}\oplus 0$. Thus $\ker(\pi|_{M'})<\mathbb{Z}\oplus 0$ is free, whose rank is less equal than $1$. Therefore, $M'$ is free and $\mathrm{rk}\leqslant n+1$. 

(ii) When $n=1$, the statement is trivial (see (i)). Consider the case of $n=2$. By [[MATH/抽象代数II/Nodes/1.2 Free Abelian Group#^f38221\|#^f38221]], $M'$ can be decomposed a s $M'=\pi(M')\oplus\ker\pi|_{M'}$ where $\pi(M')\leqslant \mathbb{Z}$ and $\ker\pi|_{M'}\leqslant \mathbb{Z}\oplus 0$. By case of $n=1$, we get $M'=a_1f_1'\oplus a_2f_2'$ for some basis $f_1',f_2'$ and $a_1,a_2\geqslant 0$. If one of $a_i=0$, we have done. So suppose $a_i\neq 0$, $i=1,2$. (naive idea: hope $a_1\mid a_2$, i.e. want $a_1$ to be "small".) Consider the set 

$$P=\{a\in \mathbb{Z}_{\geqslant 0}:\exists b\in \mathbb{Z}_{\geqslant 0},\mbox{ and there exists a basis } (f_1'',f_2'') \mbox{ of }M\mbox{ such that }M'=\left\langle af_1'',bf_2''\right\rangle\}.$$

Since $a_1\in P$ and $P$ is non-empty, then there exists unique element $\alpha\in P$. So $M'=\left\langle \alpha f_1,\beta f_2\right\rangle$. Now claim that $\alpha\mid\beta$. Otherwise, $(\alpha,\beta)=t<\alpha$. Write $\alpha=tx_1$ and $\beta=tx_2$ and let $t=\alpha y_1+\beta y_2$. Then $x_1y_1+x_2y_2=1$. Note that $M'=\left\langle \alpha f_1,\beta f_2\right\rangle=\left\langle t(x_1f_1+x_2f_2),tx_1x_2(-y_2f_1+y_1f_2)\right\rangle$ by $\det\left[ \begin{matrix} 1 & 1 \\ -x_2y_2 & x_1y_1  \end{matrix} \right]=1$. In addition, $(x_1f_1+x_2f_2,-y_2f_1+y_1f_2)=(f_1,f_2)\left[ \begin{matrix} x_1 & -y_2 \\ x_2 & y_1 \end{matrix} \right]$ and $\det \left[ \begin{matrix} x_1 & -y_2 \\ x_2 & y_1 \end{matrix} \right]=1$ yield that $(x_1f_1+x_2f_2,-y_2f_1+y_1f_2)$ is a basis. Thus $t\in P$, which contradicts with minimality of $\alpha$. So $\alpha\mid\beta$. Now we finish the proof of the case $n=2$. (For example, let $M'=\left\langle 10e_1,15e_2\right\rangle<\left\langle e_1,e_2\right\rangle$. Use above algorithm, $(\alpha, \beta)=(10,15)=5=t$. Then $x_1=2,x_2=3$ and $y_1=-1,y_2=1$. It yields that $M'=\left\langle 5(2e_1+3e_2),30(-e_1-e_2)\right\rangle$. )

Now suppose that the statement is true for $n$-case. now suppose $M=\mathbb{Z}^{n+1}$. Again, $M'=\ker|_{M'}\oplus\pi(M')$ where $\pi(M)\leqslant \mathbb{Z}^n$ and $\ker|_{M'}\leqslant \mathbb{Z}\oplus 0$. By induction hypothesis, $\pi(M')=\left\langle a_1f_1,a_2f_2,\cdots,a_{n+1}f_{n+1}\right\rangle$ where $a_2\mid a_3\mid\cdots\mid a_{n+1}$. Let

$$P=\{a\in \mathbb{Z}_+:\exists b_2\mid b_3\mid\cdots\mid b_{n+1}\mbox{ and }\exists(f_1,\cdots,f_{n+1})\mbox{ such that }M'=\left\langle a_1f_1,\cdots,a_{n+1}f_{n+1}\right\rangle \}.$$

Since $a_1\in P$, $P$ is non-empty. Then let $\alpha$ be the minimal element of $P$. Claim that $\alpha\mid b_2$. We start with checking $\alpha\mid\beta_{n+1}$. Otherwise, $(\alpha,\beta_{n+1})=t<\alpha$ and we can use the trick in the case of $n=2$. Note that $M'=\left\langle t(x_1f_1+x_2f_{n+1},\beta_2f_2,\cdots,\beta_nf_n,tx_1x_2(-y_2f_1+yf_{n+1}))\right\rangle$ and so $t\in P$, contradiction. Next, we check $\alpha\mid \beta_n$. If not, then similar to above we can change the sequence $\alpha,\beta_2,\cdots,\beta_{n-1},\beta_n,\beta_{n+1}$ to $t,\beta_2,\cdots,\beta_{n-1},tx_1x_2,\beta_{n+1}$, where $\alpha=tx_1$ and $\beta_n=tx_2$. Claim that $tx_1x_2\mid\beta_{n+1}$. Indeed, since $tx_1\mid\beta_{n+1}$ and $tx_2\mid\beta_{n+1}$, we have $[tx_1,tx_2]\mid \beta_{n+1}$ with $[tx_1,tx_2]=tx_1x_2$. Therefore, $t\in P$, which is impossible. So $\alpha\mid\beta_n$. Repeat the procedure, we can prove that $\alpha\mid\beta_1$ and so we finish the proof.
`\end{proof}`


> [!corollary]
> Let $G$ be a finitely generated abelian group, which is generated by $n$ elements. Then any $H<G$ can be generated by $m$ elements with $m\leqslant n$.

`\begin{proof}`
By [[MATH/抽象代数II/Nodes/1.2 Free Abelian Group#^d4cf25\|#^d4cf25]], there exists free abelian group $F$ of rank $n$ giving rise to an epimorphism $\pi:F\to G$. Since $\pi^{-1}(H)<F$, by [[MATH/抽象代数II/Nodes/1.2 Free Abelian Group#^93020f\|#^93020f]] $\pi^{-1}(H)$ is free, whose rank is less equal than $n$. As $\pi^{-1}(H)\twoheadrightarrow H$, the image of a basis of $\pi^{-1}(H)$ gives a set of generators of $H$.
`\end{proof}`

