---
{"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/MATH/抽象代数II/Nodes/1.4 Group Action on a Set/","dgPassFrontmatter":true}
---


> [!theorem]
> Let $G$ be a group. If $G$ acts on $S$, then
> - The relation on $S$ defined by $x\sim x'$ iff $gx=x'$ for some $g\in G$ is an equivalent relationship.
> - For $x\in S$, let $G_x=\{h\in G:hx=x\}$. Then $G_x$ is a subgroup of $G$.


> [!definition]
> Denote the equivalence class of $x\in S$ by $\overline x=\{gx:g\in G\}$, and it is called the orbit of $x$.

**Examples.** Let $G$ be a group and $H$ be a subgroup of $G$.
- $H$ acts on $G$ by conjugation. Then $H_x:=\{h\in H:hxh^{-1}=x\}$ is the centralizer of $x$ in $H$.
- $G$ acts on $\{\mbox{all subgroups of }G\}$ by conjugation. Then $G_K:=\{g\in G:K^g=K\}$ is the normalizer of $K$.

> [!theorem]
> Let $G$ act on $S$. Then $\#|\overline x|=[G:G_x]$. 

`\begin{proof}`
Define a map $\{\mbox{all left cosets of }G_x\}\to\overline x$ by $gG_x\mapsto gx$. It is easy to show that this map is bijective.
`\end{proof}`


> [!corollary]
> Let $G$ be a finite group. Consider $G$ acting on $G$ by conjugation.
> - number of elements in conjugate class of $x\in G$ is $[G:C_G(x)]$.
> - Suppose $\overline{x_1},\cdots,\overline{x_n}$ are all distinct conjugacy classes of $G$. Then $|G|=\sum_{i=1}^n[G:C_G(x_i)]$. 
> - Let $K<G$. Then the number of subgroup of $G$ conjugate to $K$ is $[G:N_G(K)]$,

> [!theorem]
> $G$ acting on $S$ induces a group homomorphism $G\to\mathcal A(S)$, where $\mathcal A(S)$ is a group of all permutations of $S$.

> [!corollary] Cayley
> Let $G$ be a group. Then there exists a group homomorphism $G\hookrightarrow\mathcal A(G)$. In particular, if $|G|=n$, then $G\hookrightarrow S_n$, 

**Notation.** $\mathcal A(G)=\mathrm{Perm}(G)$.

**Remark.**
- $\mathrm{Inn}(G)\lhd\mathrm{Aut}(G)$ and $\mathrm{Out}(G)=\mathrm{Aut}(G)/\mathrm{Inn}(G)$
- Class equation can be rewritten as $|G|=|C_G(G)|+\sum_{x\not\in C(G)}[G:C_G(x)]$.

