---
{"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/MATH/抽象代数II/Nodes/1.7 Normal and Subnormal Series/","dgPassFrontmatter":true}
---


> [!definition] subnormal/normal series
> A finite subnormal series of $G$ is 
> 
> $$G=G_0>G_1>\cdots> G_n$$
> 
> where $G_i\rhd G_{i+1}$ for all $i$. 
> - The factors are $G_i/G_{i+1},i\geqslant 0$. 
> - The length of the series equals the number of $i$ such that $G_{i}\neq G_{i+1}$. 
> 
> Furthermore, if $G_i\lhd G_j$ for all $i>j$, then it is called a normal series.

**Example.** [[MATH/Cards/Nodes/Solvable Group\|Derived series]] and [[MATH/Cards/Nodes/Nilpotent Group\|upper central series]] are normal series.

> [!definition] refinement
> Let $G=G_0>G_1>\cdots> G_n$ be a subnormal series. An one-step-refinement is a series $G=G_0>\cdots>G_i>N>G_{i+1}>\cdots>G_n$ or $G=G_0>\cdots> G_n\rhd N$. A refinement is the series after finite times of one-step-refinement. It is called a proper refinement if the length is strictly bigger.

> [!definition] composition/solvable series
> A subnormal series $G=G_0>\cdots>G_n=\{e\}$ is called a composition series if $G_i/G_{i+1}$ is simple for all $i$, and is called solvable series if $G_i/G_{i+1}$ is abelian for all $i$.


> [!theorem]
> The followings hold.
> - Every finite group has a composition series.
> - Every refinement of a solvable series is solvable.
> - A subnormal series is a composition series iff it has no proper refinement.

`\begin{proof}`
Easy.
`\end{proof}`


> [!theorem]
> $G$ is solvable iff $G$ has a solvable series.

`\begin{proof}`
Assume that $G$ is solvable, then its derived series is a solvable series. 

Suppose $G=G_0>\cdots>G_n$ is a solvable series. Note that $G/G_1$ is abelian yields that $G_1\geqslant G^{(1)}$ and $G_1/G_2$ is abelian yields that $G_2\geqslant G_1^{(1)}\geqslant G^{(2)}$. Repeat this procedure, we have that $G^{(n)}\lhd G_n=\{e\}$ and so $G$ is solvable.
`\end{proof}`


> [!definition]
> Two subnormal series $S$ and $T$ are called *equivalent* if there exists $1$-$1$ correspondence between the non-trivial factors of $S$ and $T$, which are isomorphic pairwise.


> [!lemma] Zassenhaus
> Let $A^*\lhd A<G$ and $B^*\lhd B<G$. Then:
> - $A^*(A\cap B^*)\lhd A^*(A\cap B)$;
> - $B^*(A^*\cap B)\lhd B^*(A\cap B)$;
> - $A^*(A\cap B)/A^*(A\cap B^*)\simeq B^*(A\cap B)/B^*(A^*\cap B)$.
{ #f5c5fc}


`\begin{proof}`
Let $D=(A\cap B^*)(A^*\cap B)$. We now define an epimorphism $f:A^*(A\cap B)\twoheadrightarrow(A\cap B)/D$ with $\ker f=A^*(A\cap B^*)$, then $A^*(A\cap B)/\ker f\simeq (A\cap B)/D$. Similarly we can prove $B^*(A\cap B)/B^*(A^*\cap B)\simeq (A\cap B)/D$. 

Define $f:a\cdot c\mapsto Dc$. 
- We check $f$ is well defined. If $ac=ac_1$, then $cc_1^{-1}\in A^*$ and $cc_1^{-1}\in A\cap B$, which yields that $cc_1^{-1}\in A^*\cap B\subseteq D$. Hence, $f(c)=f(c_1)$. 
- Note that $f(a_1c_1a_2c_2)=f(a_1a_2^{c_1^{-1}}c_1c_2)=Dc_1c_2=f(a_1c_1)f(a_2c_2)$, so $f$ is a homomorphism.
- $ac\in\ker f$ iff $c\in D$ iff $c=a_1c_1$ with $a_1\in A\cap B^*$ and $c_1\in A^*\cap B$ iff $ac\in A^*(A\cap B^*)$.

Now we finish the proof.
`\end{proof}`


> [!theorem] Schreier
> Any two subnormal (rep. normal) series of $G$ has two subnormal (rep. normal) refinements that are equivalent to each other.
{ #fdb53f}


`\begin{proof}`
Let $G=G_0>\cdots>G_n$ and $G=H_0>\cdots>H_m$ be two subnormal (rep. normal) series, and let $G_{n+1}=H_{m+1}=\{e\}$. For $0\leqslant i\leqslant n$, consider 

$$G_i=G_{i+1}(G_i\cap H_0)>G_{i+1}(G_i\cap H_1)>\cdots> G_{i+1}(G_i\cap H_{m+1})=G_{i+1}.$$

By [[MATH/抽象代数II/Nodes/1.7 Normal and Subnormal Series#^f5c5fc\|#^f5c5fc]], this is still a subnormal (rep. normal) series. Denote $G(i,j)=G_{i+1}(G_i\cap H_j)$, so we get a refinement of $G=G_0>\cdots>G_n$:

$$G=G(0,0)>G(0,1)>\cdots>G(0,m+1)=G(1,0)>\cdots> G(n,m).$$

Similarly, set $H(i,j)=H_{j+1}(G_i\cap H_j)$ and get 

$$G=H(0,0)>\cdots>H(n,0)>H(0,1)>\cdots>H(n,m).$$

Notice that $G(i,j)/G(i,j+1)\cong H(i,j)/H(i+1,j)$, then these two series are equivalent.
`\end{proof}`


> [!theorem] Jordan-Holder
> Any two composition series are equivalent.

`\begin{proof}`
By [[MATH/抽象代数II/Nodes/1.7 Normal and Subnormal Series#^fdb53f\|#^fdb53f]].
`\end{proof}`