---
{"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/MATH/抽象代数II/Nodes/2.2 Modules/","dgPassFrontmatter":true}
---


> [!definition]
> Let $R$ be a commutative ring. An $R$-module $M$ is an additive abelian group with a function $R\times M\to M$, denoted as $(r,a)\to ra$ such that $\forall r,s\in R$, $a,b\in M$, we have 
> - $r(a+b)=ra+rb$;
> - $(r+s)a=ra+sa$;
> - $(rs)a=r(sa)$;
> - $1_Ra=a$.
{ #gdsllk}


**Examples.** 
- If $R$ is a field, then an $R$-module is called a vector space.
- Free $\mathbb{Z}$-module iff abelian group.
- $f:R\to S$ is a homomorphism of rings, then any $S$-module can be regarded as an $R$-module, using $(r,m)=f(r)\cdot m$. 
- An ideal $I\subseteq R$ is an $R$-module and $R/I$ is an $R$-module.

**Remark.** $0_R\cdot m=0_M$ for any $m\in M$ and $r\cdot 0_M=0_M$.

> [!definition]
> Let $M,N$ be two $R$-modules. Then $f:M\to N$ is called a homomorphism of $R$-module if it is a homomorphism of abelian groups and $f(rm)=rf(m)$. In this case, $\ker f\subseteq M$ and $\mathrm{Im} f\subseteq N$ are submodules.

> [!theorem]
> Let $N\subseteq M$ be an $M$-submodule. Then $M/N$ is also an $R$-module, using $(r,m+N)\mapsto rm+N$.

> [!theorem]
> Let $A$ be an $R$-module, and let $B,C\subseteq A$ be $R$-submodules.
> - $B/(B\cap C)\simeq (B+C)/C$;
> - if $C\subseteq B\subseteq A$, then $B/C\subseteq A/C$ is an $R$-submodule and $A/C\big/B/C\simeq A/B$.

> [!definition]
> - Let $A \stackrel{f}{\to} B\stackrel{g}{\to} C$ be a chain and homomorphism of $R$-modules. We say it is *exact* at $B$ if $\mathrm{Im} f=\ker g$.
> - A finite sequence $A_0\stackrel{f_1}{\to} A_1\stackrel{f_2}{\to}\cdots\stackrel{f_n}{\to}A_n$ is exact, if it is exact at each $A_i(1\leqslant i\leqslant n-1)$, that is, $\mathrm{Im} f_i=\ker f_{i+1}$ for any $i$.
> - If $0\stackrel{ 0}{\to}X\stackrel{f}{\to}Y\stackrel{g}{\to}Z\stackrel{0}{\to}0$ is exact, then we say it is *short exact*.
{ #4kfb14}


**Remark.** 
- iii) is a short exact sequence iff $f$ is injective and $g$ is surjective.
- $I\subseteq R$ is an ideal, then $0\to I\to R\to R/I\to 0$ is exact.
- Define $\mathrm{coker}f=N/\mathrm{Im} f$ and $\mathrm{coim}f=M/\ker f$. Then $0\to \mathrm{Im} f\to N\to\mathrm{coker}f\to 0$ and $0\to \ker f\to M\to\mathrm{coim}f\to 0$ are exact.

> [!lemma] short five lemma
> Suppose we have a commutative diagram
> $$\begin{CD}0 @>>> A @>f>> B @>g>> C @>>> 0 \\@. @V\alpha VV @V\beta VV @V\gamma VV @. \\0 @>>> A' @>f'>> B' @>g'>> C' @>>> 0 \\\end{CD}$$
> 
> then $\alpha,\gamma$ are monomorphism (rep. epimorphism, isomorphism) yield that $\beta$ is monomorphism (rep. epimorphism, isomorphism).
{ #b0hne4}


`\begin{proof}`
高辉说这辈子证明一次就够了。我就不证了。
`\end{proof}`


**Remark.** Short five lemma is a special case of [[MATH/交换代数/Nodes/2 Modules#^jgbcg4\|snake lemma]].

> [!definition]
> - If $0\to A\stackrel{f}{\to} B\stackrel{g}{\to}C$ is exact, then set it is a left exact sequence;
> - If $A\stackrel{f}{\to} B\stackrel{g}{\to} C\stackrel{}{\to}0$ is exact, then set it is a right exact sequence.

> [!theorem]
> Let $0\to A\stackrel{f}{\to}B\stackrel{g}{\to}C\to 0$ be a short exact sequence, then TFAE:
> - there exists $h:C\to B$ such that $g\circ h=\mathrm{id}_C$;
> - there exists $k:B\to A$ such that $k\circ f=\mathrm{id}_A$;
> - there exists a commutative diagram and so $B\simeq A\oplus C$.
> $$\begin{CD}0 @>>> A @>f>> B @>g>> C @>>> 0 \\@. @V= VV @Vs VV @V= VV @. \\0 @>>> A @>\iota_1>> A\oplus C @>\iota_2>> C' @>>> 0 \\\end{CD}$$
> 
>
{ #qtklfv}


`\begin{proof}`
iii)->i). It is easy, as $h:=s^{-1}\circ\iota_2\circ\mathrm{id}_C$. 

i)->iii). Define $t:A\oplus C\to B,(a,c)\mapsto f(a)+h(c)$. It is easy to verify when $s:=t^{-1}$ the diagram is commutative.
`\end{proof}`

