---
{"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/MATH/抽象代数II/Nodes/2.3 Noetherian Rings and Modules/","dgPassFrontmatter":true}
---


> [!definition]
> Let $I$ be an indexing set, and let $m_i\in M$. For $i\in I$:
> - say $\{m_i\}_{i\in I}$ generate $M$ if for any $m\in M$, $m=\sum_{i\in I}a_im_i$, and say $\{m_i\}_{i\in I}$ is a set of generator;
> - say $M$ is a free $A$-module, if we can choose some set if generator $\{m_i\}_{i\in I}$ such that for any $m\in M$ can be uniquely expressed as $m\in\sum_{i\in I}a_im_i$. (Equivalently, $\sum_{i\in I}a_im_i=0$ iff $a_i=0$ for all $i\in I$.)
> 
> Furthermore, we say $M$ is finitely generated or finite free if $|I|<\infty$. In this case, we can write $M=A^{\oplus d}=\oplus_{i=1}^d A_i$.


> [!theorem]
> The followings are equivalent:
> - Every non-empty family of submodule of $M$ has a maximal element. Namely, given $P=\{M_j\}_{j\in J}$, there exists $N\in P$ such that if $N\subseteq M_j$, then $M_j=N$.
> - Every increasing sequence of submodule $\{M_i\}_{i=1}^\infty$ is stationary. Namely, there exists $N$ such that $M_i=M_N$ for all $i\geqslant N$.
> - Every submodule of $M$ is finitely generated.
{ #4af1b0}


**Non-example.** Consider $\mathbb{Z}$-module $\mathbb{Q}$. It is not finitely generated. Let $M_n=\left\langle\frac{1}{2^n}\right\rangle$, then $\{M_n\}$ is not stationary.

**Example.** A vector space over a field.

`\begin{proof}`
i)->iii) Let $E\subseteq M$ be a submodule. Define $\Phi=\{G\subseteq E:G\mbox{ is finitely generated}\}$. Note that $(0)\in\Phi$. By i), there exists a maximal element $F\in\Phi$. Assume that $F\neq E$, then there exists $x\in F\setminus E$ such that $\left\langle F,x\right\rangle\in\Phi$, which is a contradiction. Therefore, $F=E$ and so $E$ is finitely generated. By the arbitrary of $E$, we finish the proof of iii).

iii)->ii) Consider the increasing sequence $\{M_i\}_{i=1}^\infty$ and define $E=\cup_{i=1}^\infty M_i$, then $E$ is still a submodule of $M$ (for any $x,y\in M$, verify $ax+by\in M$). By iii), $E$ is finitely generated. Suppose that $\{e_1,\cdots,e_d\}$ is a set of generators of $E$. Assume that $e_i\in M_{n_i}$, then $\{e_1,\cdots,e_d\}\in M_N$, where $N=\max\{n_1,\cdots,n_d\}$. It follows that $E=M_N$ and $M_n=M_N$ for all $n\geqslant N$.

ii)->i) Consider $P=\{M_i\}_{i\in I}$. Assume that there does not exist maximal element, then there is a strictly increasing sequence 

$$N_1\subsetneq N_2\subsetneq N_3\cdots$$

which contradicts with ii).
`\end{proof}`


> [!definition]
> If an $A$-module satisfies conditions in [[MATH/抽象代数II/Nodes/2.3 Noetherian Rings and Modules#^4af1b0\|#^4af1b0]], then we say $M$ is a *Noetherian $A$-module*.
> 
> If the $B$-module $B$ satisfies condition in [[MATH/抽象代数II/Nodes/2.3 Noetherian Rings and Modules#^4af1b0\|#^4af1b0]], then we say $B$ is a *Noetherian ring*.
{ #4marty}


**Remark.** $R$ is a Noetherian ring iff any ideal is finitely generated.

**Examples.** 
- $\mathbb{Z}$ is a Noetherian ring, as each ideal is finitely generated.
- $R:=\mathbb{Z}[x_1,x_2,x_3,\cdots]\supseteq(x_1,x_2,\cdots)$ is not finitely generated and so $\mathbb{Z}[x_1,x_2,\cdots]$ is not a Noetherian ring.
- Consider $R\twoheadrightarrow \mathbb{Z}[x_1,x_2,\cdots]/(x_1,x_2,\cdots)\simeq \mathbb{Z}\twoheadrightarrow \mathbb{Z}/p\mathbb{Z}$, then $\mathbb{Z}/p\mathbb{Z}$ is an $\mathbb{R}$-module and it is a Noetherian module.
- $\mathbb{Z}$ is a Noetherian ring, but $\mathbb{Q}$ is not a Noetherian $\mathbb{Z}$-module.
- $\mathbb{Q}$ is a Noetherian $\mathbb{Q}$-module, i.e., $\mathbb{Q}$ is a Noetherian ring.


> [!proposition]
> Assume that $E$ is an $A$-module. If $E'\subseteq E$ is a submodule, then $E$ is a Noetherian $A$-module iff $E'$ and $E/E'$ are both Noetherian $A$-modules.
{ #0af43c}


`\begin{proof}`
Assume that $E$ is Noetherian. For any submodule $F\subseteq E$, $F$ is finitely generated by [[MATH/抽象代数II/Nodes/2.3 Noetherian Rings and Modules#^4af1b0\|#^4af1b0]]. Then it is easy to show $E'$ is Noetherian. For any $G\subseteq E/E'$, $G$ can be written as $G=H/E'$ for some $E\supseteq H\supseteq E'$ and so $G$ is finitely generated. It follows that $E/E'$ is Noetherian. 

On the other hand, assume that $E'$ and $E/E'$ are both Noetherian $A$-modules. Let $G\subseteq E$ is a submodule, then we aim to show $G$ is finitely generated.

Idea:

$$\begin{CD}0 @>>> G\cap E' @>{}>> G@>\pi>> G/G\cap E'\simeq(G+E')/E' @>>> 0 \\@. @V{} VV @V{} VV @V{} VV @. \\0 @>>> E' @>{}>> E @>{}>> E/E' @>>> 0 \\\end{CD}$$

Since $E'$ is Noetherian, $G\cap E'$ is finitely generated. Choose a set of generator $\{f_1,\cdots,f_m\}$. Since $E/E'$ is Noetherian, $G/G\cap E'$ is finitely generated. Choose a set of generator $\{e_1,\cdots,e_n\}$, and choose some pre-image under $\pi$, that is, $\{\hat e_1,\cdots\hat e_n\}\in G$. Claim that $\{f_1,\cdots,f_m,\hat e_1,\cdots,\hat e_n\}$ generates $G$. Let $g\in G$, then $\pi(g)=\sum_{i=1}^n a_ie_i$ for some $a_i\in A$. Consider $\widetilde g=g-(\sum_{i=1}^n a_i\hat e_i)$, then $\pi(\widetilde g)=0$ and so $\widetilde g\in\ker\pi=G\cap E'$. Thus $\widetilde g=\sum_{j=1}^mb_jf_j$ and so $g=\sum_{i=1}^na_ie_i+\sum_{i=1}^m b_jf_j$. 
`\end{proof}`


> [!corollary]
> If $M_1,\cdots,M_n$ are Noetherian $A$-module, then so for $\prod_{i=1}^nM_i$.
{ #2f2111}



`\begin{proof}`
When $n=2$, consider $0\to M_1\to M_1\times M_2\to M_2\to 0$ and by [[MATH/抽象代数II/Nodes/2.3 Noetherian Rings and Modules#^0af43c\|#^0af43c]] $M_1\times M_2$ is Noetherian. By induction we finish the proof.
`\end{proof}`


> [!corollary]
> If $A$ is Noetherian, then any finitely generated $A$-module is a Noetherian $A$-module.
{ #gmjk45}


`\begin{proof}`
Note that $M$ is a finitely generated $A$-module iff there exists a surjective $A^{\oplus n}\twoheadrightarrow M$. Note that $A$ is a Noetherian $A$-module iff $A^{\oplus n}$ is a Noetherian $A$-module. By [[MATH/抽象代数II/Nodes/2.3 Noetherian Rings and Modules#^2f2111\|#^2f2111]], $A^{\oplus n}$ is Noetherian $A$-module. By [[MATH/抽象代数II/Nodes/2.3 Noetherian Rings and Modules#^0af43c\|#^0af43c]], $M$ is Noetherian.
`\end{proof}`


> [!theorem] Hilbert basis theorem
> If $A$ is Noetherian ring, then $A[x]$ is also a Noetherian ring.

`\begin{proof}`
Suppose $\mathfrak{a} \subseteq A[X]$ is a non-finitely generated left ideal. Then by recursion (using the axiom of dependent choice) there is a sequence of polynomials $\left\{f_0, f_1, \ldots\right\}$ such that if $\mathfrak{b}_n$ is the left ideal generated by $f_0, \ldots, f_{n-1}$ then $f_n \in \mathfrak{a} \backslash \mathfrak{b}_n$ is of minimal degree. By construction, $\left\{\operatorname{deg}\left(f_0\right), \operatorname{deg}\left(f_1\right), \ldots\right\}$ is a non-decreasing sequence of natural numbers. Let $a_n$ be the leading coefficient of $f_n$ and let $\mathfrak{b}$ be the left ideal in $R$ generated by $a_0, a_1, \ldots$. Since $A$ is Noetherian, the chain of ideals

$$
\left(a_0\right) \subset\left(a_0, a_1\right) \subset\left(a_0, a_1, a_2\right) \subset \cdots
$$

must terminate. Thus $\mathfrak{b}=\left(a_0, \ldots, a_{N-1}\right)$ for some integer $N$. So in particular,

$$a_N=\sum_{i<N} u_i a_i, \; u_i \in A .$$

Now consider $g=\sum_{i<N} u_i X^{\operatorname{deg}\left(f_N\right)-\operatorname{deg}\left(f_i\right)} f_i$, whose leading term is equal to that of $f_N$; moreover, $g \in \mathfrak{b}_N$. However, $f_N \notin \mathfrak{b}_N$, which means that $f_N-g \in \mathfrak{a} \backslash \mathfrak{b}_N$ has degree less than $f_N$, contradicting the minimality.
`\end{proof}`
