---
{"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/MATH/抽象代数II/Nodes/2.5 Module over PID/","dgPassFrontmatter":true}
---


> [!definition]
> Non-zero commutative rings have invariant basis number. The cardinality of any basis is called the rank of the free module $M$.


> [!lemma]
> Let $A$ be any ring. Assume that $f:M\twoheadrightarrow N$ is an epimorphism of $A$-module, with $N$ finite free. Then $M\simeq N\oplus \ker f$.
{ #77df33}


`\begin{proof}`
When $A=\mathbb{Z}$, $M$ and $N$ are abelian groups and we have proved it before.

We have the short sequence $0\to \ker f\to M\stackrel{f}{\twoheadrightarrow}N\to 0$. [[MATH/抽象代数II/Nodes/2.2 Modules#^qtklfv\|2.2 Modules#^qtklfv]] says that $M\simeq\ker f\oplus N$ iff there exists $s:N\to M$ such that $f\circ s=\mathrm{id}_N$. Because $N$ is finite free, for a basis $\{e_1,\cdots,e_n\}$ of $N$ we can pick some $\hat e_i\in M$ such that $f(\hat e_i)=e_i$. Define $s:N\to M,\sum_{i=1}^n a_ie_i=\sum_{i=1}^na_i\hat e_i$. It is well-defined because $N$ is free. It is easy to say $f\circ s=\mathrm{id}_N$.

***Alternating proof.*** Define $g:M\to N\oplus \ker f$ as follows. If $f(m)\in N$ with $f(m)=\sum a_ie_i$, then take $g(m)=(f(m),m-\sum a_i\hat e_i)$. It is easy to show $g$ is a isomorphism.
`\end{proof}`


> [!theorem]
> Let $A$ be a PID, and let $M$ be a $A$-module of rank $n$. Suppose $M'\subseteq M$ is a submodule, then:
> - $M'$ is free of rank $q$ for some $0\leqslant q\leqslant n$;
> - there exists a basis $(e_1,\cdots,e_n)$ of $M$ and non-zero $a_1\mid a_2\mid\cdots\mid a_q$ such that $(a_1e_1,\cdots,a_qe_q)$ is a basis of $M'$.

**Remark.** 
- $A=\mathbb{Z}$ is known.
- If $A$ is a domain but not PID, then the theorem fails. Indeed, suppose $I$ is not principal and $M=A$. Then $I\subseteq M$ is free of rank $1$ over $A$, which yields that $I=A\cdot c$ and $I=(c)$, contradiction.

`\begin{proof}`
The proof is similar to the case of $A=\mathbb{Z}$. 

i) Use induction on $n$. When $n=1$, $(0)\neq M'\subseteq M=A$ yields that $M'=A\cdot a$ and we finish the proof. Suppose it holds when $\mathrm{rank} M=n$, Now consider $M'\subseteq M=A^{\oplus (n+1)}$. Consider $\pi:M=A\oplus A^n\twoheadrightarrow A^n$, then restrict it to $M'$ and we get $\pi|_{M'}:M'\twoheadrightarrow\pi(M')\subseteq A^n$ where $\pi(M')$ is free of rank $\leqslant n$ by induction hypothesis. By [[MATH/抽象代数II/Nodes/2.5 Module over PID#^77df33\|#^77df33]], $M'\simeq \pi(M')\oplus \ker \pi|_{M'}$. But $\ker\pi|_{M'}=(A\oplus 0)\cap M'$ is free of rank $\leqslant 1$. Now we finish the proof.

ii) WLOG we can assume $q=n$. When $n=1$, it is trivial because $A$ is a PID. When $n=2$, define $\pi:A^{\oplus n}\to A^{\oplus n-1}$ and $M'\simeq N\oplus\ker\pi|_{M'}$. By $n=1$ case, there exists a basis of $M$ such that $M'=\left\langle a_1f_1,a_2f_2\right\rangle$. However, $a_1\not\mid a_2$ may happen. 

Consider $P=\{\mbox{ideal }(a):\exists b\in A\mbox{ and basis }(f_1,f_2)\mbox{ of }M,M'=\left\langle af_1,bf_2\right\rangle \}$. Note that $P$ is non-empty by argument above. Since $A$ is a PID and hence is Noetherian, there exists a maximal element $(\alpha)\in P$ such that $M'=\left\langle\alpha f_1,\beta f_2\right\rangle$ such that $M=\left\langle f_1,f_2\right\rangle$. We want to show $\alpha\mid \beta$, i.e., $(\beta)\subseteq(\alpha)$. Otherwise, there is $(\alpha,\beta)=(\gamma)\supsetneq(\alpha)$ with $\alpha=tx_1$, $\beta=tx_2$. Assume that $t=\alpha y_1+\beta y_2$, then we have $x_1y_1+x_2y_2=1$. We can check 

$$M'=\left\langle\alpha f_1,\beta f_2\right\rangle =\left\langle t(x_1f_1+x_2f_2), tx_1x_2(-y_2f_1+y_1f_2)\right\rangle $$

because RHS equals $\begin{bmatrix} \alpha f_1,\beta f_2\end{bmatrix}\begin{bmatrix} 1 & -x_2y_2\\ 1 & x_1y_1\end{bmatrix}$ and the matrix is invertible. In addition, $M=\left\langle x_1f_1+x_2f_2,-y_2f_1+y_1f_2\right\rangle=\begin{bmatrix} f_1 & f_2\end{bmatrix}\begin{bmatrix} x_1 & -y_2\\ x_2 & y_1\end{bmatrix}$. Therefore, $(t)\in P$, contradicting maximality of $(\alpha)$. 

Now suppose ii) holds for $M=A^{\oplus n}$. Now consider $M=A^{\oplus n+1}$. Again $M'=\ker(\pi_{M'})\oplus N=\left\langle a_1f_1\right\rangle\oplus\left\langle a_2f_2,\cdots,a_{n+1}f_{n+1}\right\rangle$ with $a_2\mid a_3\mid \cdots\mid a_{n+1}$. Define

$$P=\{(a)\subseteq A:(a)\mbox{ is an ideal, }\exists b_2\mid\cdots\mid b_{n+1}, (f_1,\cdots,f_{n+1})\mbox{ is a basis of }M,M'=\left\langle af_1,b_2f_2,\cdots,b_{n+1}f_{n+1}\right\rangle \}.$$

Since $P\neq\emptyset$ and $A$ is Noetherian, there exists a maximal element $(\alpha)\in P$, that is, $M'=\left\langle \alpha f_1,\beta_2f_2,\cdots,\beta_{n+1}f_{n+1}\right\rangle$. Claim $\alpha\mid\beta_2\mid\cdots\mid \beta_{n+1}$. First we prove $\alpha\mid\beta_{n+1}$. If not, we can change them to $\alpha/x_1$ and $x_1\beta_{n+1}$, contradicting maximality of $(\alpha)$. We then prove $\alpha\mid \beta_{n}$. If not, we can change them to $\alpha/x_1$ and $\beta_n\cdot x_1$. It deduces that 

$$M'=\left\langle \alpha f_1,\beta_2f_2,\cdots,\beta_{n}f_n,\beta_{n+1}f_{n+1}\right\rangle =\left\langle \frac{\alpha}{x_1}f_1,\beta_2f_2,\cdots,\beta_n x_1 f_n,\beta_{n+1}f_{n+1}\right\rangle .$$

We need to show $\beta x_1\mid \beta_{n+1}$. Note that $\alpha= tx_1\mid \beta_{n+1}$ and $\beta_n=tx_n\mid \beta_{n+1}$, then we have $tx_1x_n\mid\beta_{n+1}$ and so $\beta_nx_1\mid \beta_{n+1}$. Repeat this procedure, we can prove that $\alpha\mid \beta_{n}$ and then $\alpha\mid\beta_2$. Now we finish the proof.
`\end{proof}`


> [!theorem]
> Let $A$ be a PID, and let $E$ be a finite generated $A$-module. Then $E\simeq \prod_{i=1}^k A/\alpha_i$ for some ideals $\alpha_i$ such that $\alpha_1\supseteq\alpha_2\supseteq\cdots\supseteq \alpha_n$.
{ #353e4e}


`\begin{proof}`
Since $E$ is finite generated, there exists $f:A^n\twoheadrightarrow E$ and so $E\simeq A^n/\ker f\simeq (\oplus_{i=1}^n Ae_i)/(\oplus_{i=1}^qAa_ie_i)\simeq \left(\oplus_{i=1}^q(A/a_i)e_i\right)\oplus(\oplus_{i=q+1}^n Ae_j)$. Let $\alpha_i=(a_i)$ for $i\leqslant q$ and $\alpha_i=0$ for $i>q$, then we finish the proof.
`\end{proof}`


> [!definition]
> Let $A$ be a domain and $M$ be an $A$-module. We say $M$ is *torsion free*, if $am=0$ with $a\in A,m\in M$ then $a=0$ or $m=0$.


> [!corollary]
> Let $A$ be a PID, and let $M$ be a finitely generated $A$-module. Then $M$ is finite free iff $M$ is torsion free.

`\begin{proof}`
Apply [[MATH/抽象代数II/Nodes/2.5 Module over PID#^353e4e\|#^353e4e]].
`\end{proof}`


