---
{"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/MATH/抽象代数II/Nodes/3.1 Field Extension/","dgPassFrontmatter":true}
---


> [!definition]
> A field $F$ is said to be an extension of a field $K$, if $K\subseteq F$ is a subfield, denoted by $F/K$. 

**Remark.**
- $1_K=1_F$. Because $1_K^{-1}=1_K$ inside $K$ and $1_K^{-1}=1_K$ insider $F$, we have that $1_K\cdot 1_K=1_K$ with multiplication in $K$ and $1_K\cdot 1_K=1_F$ with multiplication in $F$. 
- $F$ is a $K$ vector space. Denote $[F:K]=\dim_KF$, called degree of the extension.
- We say $F/K$ is a finite extension if $[F:K]<\infty$.


> [!theorem]
> Suppose $K\stackrel{m}{\subseteq}E\stackrel{n}{\subseteq}F$ with finite $m,n$. Then $[F:K]=[F:E][E:K]$.
{ #ab12ed}


`\begin{proof}` 
Suppose $[F:E]=n$, then $F=\oplus_{i=1}^n E x_i$ with $x_i\in F$. Suppose $[E:K]=n$, then $E=\oplus_{j=1}^m Ky_j$ with $y_j\in E$. Note that $\{x_iy_j:1\leqslant i\leqslant n,1\leqslant j\leqslant m\}$ are linear independent and it is a basis of $F$ over $K$, then we finish the proof.
`\end{proof}`


**Remark.** For $F/E/K$, i.e., $K\subseteq E\subseteq K$, we say $E$ is an *intermediate extension*.


> [!definition]
> The followings hold.
> - Let $F$ be a field and let $X\subseteq F$ be a subset. Define the subfield (rep. subring) generated by $X$ as the intersection of all subfields (rep. subring) containing $X$.
> - Let $F/K$ be a field extension and let $X\subseteq F$ be a subset. Denote $K[x]$ be the subring of $F$ generated by $K\cup X$, and denote $K(x)$ be the subfield generated by $K\cup X$.
> - If $X=\{u_1,\cdots,u_n\}$ is finite, then we say $K(u_1,\cdots,u_n)$ is a finitely generated extension of $K$. If $X=\{n\}$, then we call $K(n)/K$ is a simple extension.

> [!theorem]
> Let $F/K$ be a field extension. Assume that $u\in F$ and $u_1,\cdots,u_n\in F$. Then:
> - $K[u]=\{f(u):f\in K[x]\mbox{ is a polynormial}\}$;
> - $K[u_1,\cdots,u_n]=\{f(u_1,\cdots,u_n):f\in K[x_1,\cdots,x_n]\}$;
> - $K(u)=\{f(u)/g(u):f,g\in K[u],g(u)\neq 0\}$;
> - $K(u_1,\cdots,u_n)=\{f(u_1,\cdots,u_n)/g(u_1,\cdots,u_n):f,g\in K[x_1,\cdots,x_n],g(u_1,\cdots,u_n)\neq 0\}$. 
>
{ #248a7b}


`\begin{proof}`
Easy.
`\end{proof}`


> [!definition]
> Suppose $L, M\subseteq F$, then denote the composite $LM$ as the subfield generated by $L\cup M$.


**Remark.** If $K\subseteq L\subseteq F$ and $K\subseteq M\subseteq F$, then $[LM:K]\leqslant[M:K][L:K]$.


> [!definition]
> Let $F/K$ be a field extension.
> - We say $u\in F$ is algebraic over $K$ if there exists non-zero $f\in K[x]$ such that $f(u)=0$.
> - We say $u\in F$ is transcendental over $K$ if for all non-zero $f(x)\in K[x]$, $f(u)\neq 0$.
> - We say $F/K$ is an algebraic extension if all elements in $F$ is algebra over $K$.
> - We say $F/K$ is an transcendental extension if there exists elements in $F$ is transcendental over $K$.


**Example.** Consider $\mathbb{Q}\subseteq \mathbb{R}\subseteq \mathbb{C}$, then:
- $\mathbb{C}/\mathbb{R}$ is algebraic;
- $\mathbb{R}/\mathbb{Q}$ is transcendental.

**Example.** Let $K$ be a field. Then $K(x)=\mathrm{Frac}(K[x])$ is transcendental over $K$.


> [!theorem]
> Let $F/K$ be a field extension, then there exists an isomorphism of fields $K(u)\stackrel{\varphi}{\simeq} K(x)$ such that $\varphi|_{K}=\mathrm{id}$. 
{ #zvyjyw}


`\begin{proof}`
Define 

$$\varphi:K(x)\to K(u),\frac{f(x)}{g(x)}\mapsto \frac{f(u)}{g(u)}.$$

It is obvious that $\varphi$ is a field homomorphism, which is injective. Thus $K(u)\simeq K(x)$ by [[MATH/抽象代数II/Nodes/3.1 Field Extension#^248a7b\|#^248a7b]].
`\end{proof}`


> [!theorem]
> Let $F/K$ be a field extension and let $u\in F$ be algebraic over $K$. Then:
> - $K(u)=K[u]$;
> - $K(u)\simeq K[x]/(f)$ where $f\in K[x]$ is an irreducible monic polynomial with $\deg f\geqslant 1$ uniquely determined by $f(u)=0$, and $g(u)=0$ iff $f\mid g$;
> - $[K[u]:K]=n=\deg f$;
> - $\{1,u,\cdots,u^{n-1}\}$ is a basis of $K(u)$ as a $K$-vector space;
> - any $b\in K(u)$ can be uniquely written as $b=\sum_{i=0}^{n-1}k_iu^i$ with $k_i\in K$.
{ #71f159}


`\begin{proof}`
Most details are skipped. Define $\varphi:K[x]\to K[u],f(x)\mapsto f(u)$, then $\ker \varphi=(f)$ by $K[x]$ PID. It follows that $K[u]\simeq K[x]/(f)$. Since $K[u]$ is an integral domain, $(f)$ is a prime ideal and so $f$ is irreducible. Note that *in PID each non-zero prime ideal is a maximal ideal*, then $K[u]$ is a field and so $K(u)=K[u]$.
`\end{proof}`


> [!theorem]
> Suppose $F/K$ with $[F:K]<\infty$, then $F$ is finitely generated extension and it is an algebraic extension.

`\begin{proof}`
For any $u\in F\setminus K$, there exists $n\in \mathbb{N}_+$ such that $\{1,u,\cdots,u^{n-1}\}$ are linear independent, then $\sum_{i=0}^n\alpha_i u^i=0$ where $\alpha_i$ are not all zero. Hence $u$ is algebraic. Also, since $F=\oplus_{i=1}^n K\alpha_i$ for some $\alpha_i\in F$, then $K(\alpha_1,\cdots,\alpha_n)=F$.
`\end{proof}`


> [!theorem]
> Let $F/K$ be a field extension. Suppose there exists finite subset $X\subseteq F$ such that $F=K(X)$, and each element of $X$ is algebraic over $K$, then $[F:K]<\infty$. 
{ #48e5f4}


`\begin{proof}`
By [[MATH/抽象代数II/Nodes/3.1 Field Extension#^ab12ed\|#^ab12ed]] and [[MATH/抽象代数II/Nodes/3.1 Field Extension#^71f159\|#^71f159]].
`\end{proof}`


> [!theorem]
> Let $F/K$ be a field extension. Define 
> 
> $$E=\{x\in F:x\mbox{ is algebric over }K\}.$$
> 
> Then $E$ is a subfield.

**Remark.** It is a corollary of [[MATH/抽象代数II/Nodes/3.1 Field Extension#^48e5f4\|#^48e5f4]]. 高辉说他在厕所证明了这个。


**Example.** Consider $\mathbb{C}/\mathbb{Q}$. If $x\in \mathbb{C}$ is algebraic over $\mathbb{Q}$, it is called an algebraic number. Then $\overline{\mathbb{Q}}=\{\mbox{all algebraic numbers}\}\subseteq \mathbb{C}$ is a subfield, called algebraic closure of $\mathbb{Q}$.