---
{"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/MATH/抽象代数II/Nodes/3.3 Galois Extension/","dgPassFrontmatter":true}
---


> [!NOTE] Common notations
> In this section:
> - we always assume that $K\subseteq E$ and $K\subseteq F$;
> - If $K\subseteq E\subseteq F$, then we say $E$ is intermediate extension;
> - for a field homomorphism: $f:E\to F$, it always have $f(0)=0$ and $f(1)=1$, that is, $f$ is injective.
{ #7bwsg3}


> [!definition]
> We say a field homomorphism $f:E\to F$ is a $K$-homomorphism if it is also a homomorphism of $K$-vector spaces. 
> 
> In fact, $f$ is a $K$-homomorphism iff $f|_{K}=\mathrm{id}$.

`\begin{proof}`
Note that $f(k)=kf(1)=k$ and $f(ke)=kf(e)$.
`\end{proof}`

> [!definition]
> Denote $\mathrm{Aut}_K(F)=\{\sigma:F\to F\mbox{ which is }K\mbox{-homomorphism and a field automorphism}\}$. 

**Remark.** $\mathrm{Aut}_K(F)$ is a group; if $[F:K]<\infty$, then $\mathrm{Aut}_K(F)=\{\sigma:F\to F\mbox{ which is }K\mbox{-homomorphism}\}$ by $\sigma$ injective and $[F:K]$ finite.

> [!lemma]
> For any $\sigma\in\mathrm{Aut}_K(F)$ and $f\in K[T]$, if $f(u)=0$, then $f(\sigma(u))=0$. 

`\begin{proof}`
Easy.
`\end{proof}`


**Remark.** This lemma tells us $\mathrm{Aut}_K(F)$ acts on $\{F\mbox{-roots of } f(T)\in K[T]\}$.

**Examples.** 
- $\mathrm{Aut}_K(K)=\mathrm{Aut}_{\mathbb{Q}}(\mathbb{Q}[2^{1/3}])=\{1\}$. 
- $\mathrm{Aut}_\mathbb{R}({\mathbb{C}})\simeq \mathrm{Aut}_\mathbb{Q}(\mathbb{Q}[\sqrt 2])\simeq \mathbb{Z}/2\mathbb{Z}$. 
- $\mathrm{Aut}_{\mathbb{Q}}(\mathbb{Q}(\sqrt 2,\sqrt 3))=\mathrm{Aut}_\mathbb{Q}(\mathbb{Q}(\sqrt2+\sqrt 3))$ and so $\mathrm{Irr}(\sqrt 2+\sqrt 3,\mathbb{Q})=(x^2-1)^2-8x^2$, then we have $\mathrm{Aut}_\mathbb{Q}(\mathbb{Q}(\sqrt 2+\sqrt 3))\simeq \mathbb{Z}/2\mathbb{Z}\times \mathbb{Z}/2\mathbb{Z}$. See [here](https://math.stackexchange.com/questions/455067/computing-galois-group-of-mathbbq-sqrt2-sqrt3-mathbbq). 


> [!lemma]
> Let $K\subseteq F$, and let $H<\mathrm{Aut}_KF$. Let $H'=F^H$, then $K\subseteq H\subseteq F$ is an intermediate extension. 
> 
> Let $K\subseteq E\subseteq F$, and let $E'=\mathrm{Aut}_EF$. Then $E'<\mathrm{Aut}_KF$ is a subgroup.

**Example.** Consider the field extension $\mathbb{Q}(\sqrt 2,\sqrt 3)$ and the corresponding Galois group $\mathrm{Aut}_\mathbb{Q}(\mathbb{Q}(\sqrt2,\sqrt 3))=\{\sigma_1,\sigma_2,\sigma_3,\sigma_4\}$, where $\sigma_1=\mathrm{id}$, $\sigma_2((\sqrt 2,\sqrt 3))=(-\sqrt 2,\sqrt 3)$, $\sigma_3((\sqrt 2,\sqrt 3))=(\sqrt 2,-\sqrt 3)$ and $\sigma_4((\sqrt 2,\sqrt 3))=(-\sqrt 2,-\sqrt 3)$.
- There are $5$ subgroups.
	- When $H=\left\langle \sigma_4\right\rangle$, $F^H=\mathbb{Q}(\sqrt 6)$.
	- When $H=\left\langle \sigma_2\right\rangle$, $F^H=\mathbb{Q}(\sqrt 2)$.
	- When $H=\left\langle \sigma_3\right\rangle$, $F^H=\mathbb{Q}(\sqrt 3)$.
	- When $H=\{\mathrm{id}\}$, $F^H=\mathbb{Q}(\sqrt 2,\sqrt 3)$.
	- When $H=\left\langle \sigma_2,\sigma_3\right\rangle$, $F^H=\mathbb{Q}$. 
- Conversely, there are $5$ intermediate fields.
	- When $E=\mathbb{Q}(\sqrt 2)$, $E'=\left\langle \sigma_2\right\rangle$.
	- When $E=\mathbb{Q}(\sqrt 3)$, $E'=\left\langle \sigma_3\right\rangle$.
	- When $E=\mathbb{Q}(\sqrt 6)$, $E'=\left\langle \sigma_4\right\rangle$.
	- When $E=\mathbb{Q}$, $E'=\{\mathrm{id}\}$
	- When $E=\mathbb{Q}(\sqrt 2,\sqrt 3)$, $E'=\langle\sigma_2,\sigma_3\rangle$.

**Remark.** There seems to be a nice correspondence between subgroups and subfields. However, how many intermediate fields exactly are there? By [[MATH/抽象代数II/Nodes/3.2 Splitting Fields, Normal Extension and Separable Extensions#^be3ym9\|theorem of primitive element]], there exists $\alpha$ such that $\mathbb{Q}\subseteq \mathbb{Q}(\alpha)\subseteq\mathbb{Q}(\sqrt 2,\sqrt 3)$ for any intermediate field. Recall an [[MATH/抽象代数II/Nodes/HW12#^g9lbjb\|exercise]] in HW, it is easy to prove that there are $5$ intermediate fields exactly.

**Another examples.**
- $\mathrm{Aut}_{\mathbb{Q}}(\mathbb{Q}(\sqrt 5, 2^{1/3}))\simeq \mathbb{Z}/2\mathbb{Z}$ has $2$ subgroups but has more than $2$ intermediate extensions. 
- $\mathrm{Aut}_{\mathbb{F}_p(x)}(\mathbb{F}_p(x^{1/p}))=\{1\}$, but $\mathbb{F}_p(x^{1/p})$ has $2$ intermediate extensions.

> [!definition]
> Let $K\subseteq F$. If $(\mathrm{Aut}_KF)'=F^{\mathrm{Aut}_KF}=K$, then say $F$ is a Galois extension of $K$. For short, we say $F/K$ is a Galois extension or say $F$ is Galois over $K$. In this case, write $\mathrm{Gal}(F/K)=\mathrm{Aut}_KF$ and call it the Galois group of the Galois extension.


> [!theorem] fundamental theorem of Galois theory: the finite case
> Suppose $F/K$ is a finite Galois extension. Then there is a bijection between 
> 
> $$\{E:K\subseteq E\subseteq F\}\longleftrightarrow \{H:H<\mathrm{Gal}(F/K)\}$$
> 
> given by $E\to E'$, $H'\gets H$. Furthermore,
> - If $K\subseteq E_1\subseteq E_2\subseteq F$, then $E_2'<E_1'$ and $[E_2:E_1]=[E_1':E_2']$.
> - For any $K\subseteq E\subseteq F$, $F/E$ is also Galois and $E/K$ is Galois iff $E'$ is a normal subgroup. In this case, $\mathrm{Gal}(E/K)=\mathrm{Gal}(F/K)/E'=\mathrm{Gal}(F/K)/\mathrm{Gal}(F/E)$.
{ #pmz37u}


`\begin{proof}`
See [[MATH/抽象代数II/Nodes/3.5 Proof of Fundamental Theorem of Galois Theory\|3.5 Proof of Fundamental Theorem of Galois Theory]].
`\end{proof}`


**Remark.** Galois extension is not transitive, that is, it is possible that $A/B$ and $B/C$ are Galois, but $A/C$ is not Galois. The reason is normality is not transitive, see [[MATH/抽象代数II/Nodes/3.2 Splitting Fields, Normal Extension and Separable Extensions#^90ebxk\|here]]. 

