---
{"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/MATH/抽象代数II/Nodes/3.5 Proof of Fundamental Theorem of Galois Theory/","dgPassFrontmatter":true}
---


In this section, we prove the fundamental theorem of Galois theory. Firstly we prove the following theorem.

> [!theorem]
> Let $F/K$ be a finite extension. Then TFAE:
> - $F/K$ is Galois;
> - $F/K$ is separable and normal;
> - $F$ is a splitting field of a separable polynomial $f(T)\in K[T]$. 
{ #232bdc}


`\begin{proof}`
i)->ii) Let $u\in F$. Suppose $\mathrm{Irr}(u,K)=f(T)$ factors as $\prod_{i=1}^n(T-u_i)$ in some $\overline F[T]$. We aim to show $u_i\in F$ and $u_i$ are distinct. Now suppose (after reordering) $u_1,\cdots,u_m$ are all the distinct $F$-roots with $u_1=u$ and write $g(T)=\prod_{j=1}^m(T-u_j)\in F[T]$. Note that $\mathrm{Aut}_KF$ acts on the set $\{u_1,\cdots,u_m\}$ because given any $\sigma\in\mathrm{Aut}_KF$, $\sigma(g(T))=\prod_{j=1}^m(T-\sigma(u_j))=g(T)$. Hence, $g(T)\in F^{\mathrm{Aut}_KF}[T]=K[T]$ and so $g(T)=f(T)$. Therefore, $u_1,\cdots,u_n$ are all contained in $F$ and they are distinct.

ii)->iii) Since $F/K$ is normal, $F$ is a splitting field of some $f(T)\in K[T]$. Each irreducible factor of $f(T)$ is the minimal polynomial of some $u\in F$ and so it is separable.

iii)->i) By [[MATH/抽象代数II/Nodes/3.4 Group Characters#^m1looz\|3.4 Group Characters#^m1looz]], we need to find $[F:K]$-many elements in $\mathrm{Aut}_KF$. By induction on $[F:K]$. Pick any root $\alpha$ of $f(T)$ and let $p(T)=\mathrm{Irr}(\alpha,K)\mid f(T)$. 

We will construct elements in $\mathrm{Aut}_KF$ using $K\subseteq K(\alpha)\subseteq F$. Let $p(T)=\prod_{i=1}^s(T-\alpha_i)$ with $\alpha=\alpha_1$. [[MATH/抽象代数II/Nodes/3.1 Field Extension#^71f159\|Recall]] that for any $1\leqslant i\leqslant s$ we have $\theta_i:K(\alpha)\simeq K[T]/(p(T))\simeq K(\alpha_i)$. Then by [[MATH/抽象代数II/Nodes/3.2 Splitting Fields, Normal Extension and Separable Extensions#^28f933\|3.2 Splitting Fields, Normal Extension and Separable Extensions#^28f933]], $\theta_i$ extends to $\theta_i:F\to F$, and these are distinct elements in $\mathrm{Aut}_KF$ by $\theta_i(\alpha)=\alpha_i$. 

Since $f(T)$ is separable over $K(\alpha)[T]$ and $F$ is a splitting field of $f$, we have $F/K(\alpha)$ is Galois by induction hypothesis. By [[MATH/抽象代数II/Nodes/3.4 Group Characters#^m1looz\|3.4 Group Characters#^m1looz]] $\mathrm{Aut}_{K(\alpha)}F$ has exactly $n/s$ elements, denoted as $\{\beta_1,\cdots,\beta_{n/s}\}$. It is easy to show $\theta_i\beta_j$ are distinct elements in $\mathrm{Aut}_KF$. Otherwise, suppose $Q_i\beta_j=Q_a\beta_b$, then $Q_i(\alpha)=Q_a(\alpha)$ and $i=a$. Thus $j=b$. 

Now we finish the proof by induction.
`\end{proof}`


> [!corollary]
> If $F/K$ is Galois and $F\supseteq E\supseteq K$, then $F/E$ is Galois. 
{ #l2077i}


`\begin{proof}`
By [[MATH/抽象代数II/Nodes/3.5 Proof of Fundamental Theorem of Galois Theory#^232bdc\|#^232bdc]] ii).
`\end{proof}`


Now we are ready to show the fundamental theorem of Galois theory.


<div class="transclusion internal-embed is-loaded"><a class="markdown-embed-link" href="/math/ii/nodes/3-3-galois-extension/#pmz37u" aria-label="Open link"><svg xmlns="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg" width="24" height="24" viewBox="0 0 24 24" fill="none" stroke="currentColor" stroke-width="2" stroke-linecap="round" stroke-linejoin="round" class="svg-icon lucide-link"><path d="M10 13a5 5 0 0 0 7.54.54l3-3a5 5 0 0 0-7.07-7.07l-1.72 1.71"></path><path d="M14 11a5 5 0 0 0-7.54-.54l-3 3a5 5 0 0 0 7.07 7.07l1.71-1.71"></path></svg></a><div class="markdown-embed">



> [!theorem] fundamental theorem of Galois theory: the finite case
> Suppose $F/K$ is a finite Galois extension. Then there is a bijection between 
> 
> $\{E:K\subseteq E\subseteq F\}\longleftrightarrow \{H:H<\mathrm{Gal}(F/K)\}$
> 
> given by $E\to E'$, $H'\gets H$. Furthermore,
> - If $K\subseteq E_1\subseteq E_2\subseteq F$, then $E_2'<E_1'$ and $[E_2:E_1]=[E_1':E_2']$.
> - For any $K\subseteq E\subseteq F$, $F/E$ is also Galois and $E/K$ is Galois iff $E'$ is a normal subgroup. In this case, $\mathrm{Gal}(E/K)=\mathrm{Gal}(F/K)/E'=\mathrm{Gal}(F/K)/\mathrm{Gal}(F/E)$. 

</div></div>


`\begin{proof}`
*Step 0.* Show the bijection. That is:
- $E\mapsto E'\mapsto (E')'=E''$, aiming to show $E''=E$;
- $H\mapsto H'\mapsto H''$, aiming to show $H''=H$.

Note that $E''=F^{E'}=F^{\mathrm{Aut}_EF}=E$ because $F/E$ is Galois. Also, note that $H''=\mathrm{Aut}_{H'}F=\mathrm{Aut}_{F^H}F$ and $H\leqslant H''$. By [[MATH/抽象代数II/Nodes/3.5 Proof of Fundamental Theorem of Galois Theory#^l2077i\|#^l2077i]], $F/F^H$ is Galois and $[F:F^H]=|\mathrm{Gal}(F/F^H)|=|H''|$ by [[MATH/抽象代数II/Nodes/3.4 Group Characters#^m1looz\|3.4 Group Characters#^m1looz]] and $[F:F^H]=|H|$ by [[MATH/抽象代数II/Nodes/3.4 Group Characters#^ehefrs\|3.4 Group Characters#^ehefrs]]. Hence, $|H|=|H''|$ and so $H=H''$. Now we finish the proof.

*Step 1.* i) is easy to show by

$$[E_2:E_1]=\frac{[F:E_1]}{[F:E_2]}=\frac{|\mathrm{Gal}(F/E_1)|}{|\mathrm {Gal}(F/E_2)|}=\frac{|E_1'|}{|E_2'|}.$$

*Step 2.* Show ii).
{ #3hrobf}


We first show the followings.

> [!definition]
> For $K\subseteq E\subseteq F$, we say $E$ is stable if for any $\sigma\in\mathrm{Aut}_KF$, $\sigma(E)\subseteq E$. 

**Remark.** If above holds, then $\sigma^{-1}(E)\subseteq E$ and $E\subseteq \sigma(E)$. Thus $\sigma(E)=E$. Furthermore, it implies that $\sigma|_E\in\mathrm{Aut}_KE$. 

> [!lemma]
> Let $F/K$ be any algebraic extension. 
> - Let $F\supseteq E\supseteq K$ with $E$ stable. Then $E'=\mathrm{Aut}_EF<\mathrm{Aut}_KF$ is normal.
> - If $H<\mathrm{Aut}_KF$ is normal, then $H'=F^H$ is stable.

`\begin{proof}`
i) Let $\tau\in E'$, and let $\sigma\in \mathrm{Aut}_KF$. It suffices to show $\sigma^{-1}\tau\sigma\in\mathrm{Aut}_EF$. Let $e\in E$. Then $\sigma^{-1}\tau\sigma(e)=e$ as $\sigma(e)\in E$. 

ii) Let $\sigma\in\mathrm{Aut}_KF$. We want to show $\sigma(u)\in H'$ for all $u\in H'$. That is, for any $h\in H$, $h(\sigma(u))=\sigma(u)$ for all $u\in H'$. Then $(\sigma^{-1}h\sigma)(u)=u$ by $\sigma^{-1}h\sigma\in H$ and we finish the proof.
`\end{proof}`


> [!lemma]
> Let $K\subseteq E\subseteq F$, $F/K$ is Galois and $E$ is stable. Then $E/K$ is Galois.

`\begin{proof}`
Note that $E/K$ is Galois iff $E^{\mathrm{Aut}_KE}=K$ iff $E^{\mathrm{Aut}_KE}\subseteq K$ iff for any $u\in E\setminus K$ there exists $\sigma\in\mathrm{Aut}_KE$ such that $\sigma(u)\neq u$. Now we construct $\sigma$ for each given $u$.

Since $F/K$ is Galois, for this $u\in F\setminus K$, there exists $\widetilde\sigma\in \mathrm{Aut}_KF$ such that $\widetilde \sigma(u)\neq u$. Since $E$ is stable, $\widetilde\sigma|_E\in\mathrm{Aut}_KE$ and it is what we desire.
`\end{proof}`


> [!lemma]
> Let $K\subseteq E\subseteq F$ be a finite extension. Suppose $E/K$ is Galois, then $E$ is stable.

`\begin{proof}`
For any given $u\in E$, we aim to show $\sigma(u)\in E$ for all $\sigma\in\mathrm{Aut}_KF$. Let $\mathrm{Irr}(u,K)=\prod_{i=1}^n(T-u_i)$ with $u_i\in E$ and $u_1=u$ by $E/K$ Galois and [[MATH/抽象代数II/Nodes/3.5 Proof of Fundamental Theorem of Galois Theory#^232bdc\|#^232bdc]]. Then $\sigma(u)=u_j$ for some $1\leqslant j\leqslant n$ and so $\sigma(u)\in E$. Therefore, $E$ is stable.
`\end{proof}`


> [!lemma] summary of lemmas above
> Suppose $K\subseteq E\subseteq F$ is a finite extension and $F/K$ is Galois. Then TFAE:
> - $E/K$ is Galois;
> - $\mathrm{Aut}_EF\lhd\mathrm{Aut}_KF$;
> - $E$ is stable.
{ #049cad}


Now we get back to [[MATH/抽象代数II/Nodes/3.5 Proof of Fundamental Theorem of Galois Theory#^3hrobf\|here]] and continue to prove ii) of the fundamental theorem of Galois theory. 

By [[MATH/抽象代数II/Nodes/3.5 Proof of Fundamental Theorem of Galois Theory#^049cad\|#^049cad]], it remains to show $\mathrm{Gal}(E/K)=\mathrm{Gal}(F/K)/E'=\mathrm{Gal}(F/K)/\mathrm{Gal}(F/E)$. Since $E$ is stable, there is a map 

$$\alpha:\mathrm{Aut} _KF\to\mathrm{Aut} _KE,\sigma\mapsto\sigma|_E$$

which is a group homomorphism with $\ker \alpha=\mathrm{Aut}_EF$. Thus there is an embedding $\mathrm{Aut}_KF/\mathrm{Aut}_EF\hookrightarrow \mathrm{Aut}_KE$. But this is bijective because 

$$|\text{LHS}|=\frac{[F:K]}{[F:E]}=[E:K]=|\text{RHS}|.$$

Now we finish the proof.
`\end{proof}`
