---
{"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/MATH/抽象代数II/Nodes/3.9 Cyclic and Cyclotomic (分圆) Extension/","dgPassFrontmatter":true}
---


In this section, we aim to classify all cyclic and cyclotomic extensions for $K$ satisfying certain condition.

# Cyclic Extensions

> [!definition]
> We say $F/K$ is a cyclic (rep. abelian) extension if $F/K$ is Galois with $\mathrm{Gal}(F/K)$ is a cyclic (rep. abelian) group.


> [!definition]
> Let $F/K$ be a Galois extension, and let $G=\mathrm{Gal}(F/K)$. For any $u\in F$, define 
> - the norm of $u$ as $N_{F/K}(u)=\prod_{g\in G}g(u)$;
> - the trace of $u$ as $\mathrm{tr}_{F/K}(u)=\sum_{g\in G}g(u)$.
> 
> Clearly, $N_{F/K}(u)$ and $\mathrm{tr}_{F/K}(u)$ are contained in $F^G=K$.


> [!theorem]
> Suppose $F/K$ is a cyclic extension of degree $n$, with $\mathrm{Gal}(F/K)=\left\langle\sigma\right\rangle\simeq \mathbb{Z}/n\mathbb{Z}$. Let $u\in F$, then:
> - $\mathrm{tr}(u)=0$ iff $u=v-\sigma(v)$;
> - ([[MATH/Group Cohomology - Harpreet Bedi/Nodes/3 Hilbert Theorem 90\|Hilbert 90]]) $N(u)=1$ iff $u=v\sigma(v)^{-1}$ for some $v\in F$.
{ #21b820}


`\begin{proof}`
i) One direction is easy. Now we assume that $\mathrm{tr}(u)=0$, and set 

$$v=\frac{1}{n}\left(\sum_{i=0}^{n-2}(n-1-i)\sigma^i(u)\right).$$

Remark that $1/n\in K$ as $\mathrm{char} =0$. Then we can compute directly to show $v-\sigma(v)=u$. 

ii) One direction is easy. Consider $\sigma^i:F^\times\to F^{\times}$ as characters. Define $h$ as a linear combination of characters

$$h=u\sigma^0+(u\sigma(u))\sigma^1+\cdots+(u\sigma(u)\cdots\sigma^{n-1}(u))\sigma^{n-1},$$

and there exists $y\in F^\times$ such that $h(y)\neq 0$. Let $v=h(y)$, then it is easy to verify $\sigma(v)=\dfrac{1}{u}v$ by $N(u)=1$ and so $u=v\sigma(v)^{-1}$.
`\end{proof}`


> [!lemma]
> Let $K$ be a field, and let $n$ be a positive integer. Suppose $K$ contains a primitive $n$-th root of unity $\zeta$. 
> - If $d\mid n$, then $\eta=\zeta^{n/d}$ is a primitive $d$-th root of unity. 
> - If $d\mid n$ and $u$ is a root of $x^d-a\in K[x]$, then $x^d-a$ has $d$ distinct roots $u\cdot\eta^i$ with $0\leqslant i\leqslant d-1$. In addition, $K(u)$ is a splitting field of $x^d-a$ over $K$ and is Galois over $K$, with $\mathrm{Gal}(K(u)/K)<\mathbb{Z}/d\mathbb{Z}$, where the equality holds iff $x^d-a$ is irreducible over $K$.
{ #e267b2}


`\begin{proof}`
i) is easy. For ii), $g\in\mathrm{Gal}(K(u)/K)$ is uniquely determined by $g(u)=u\cdot\zeta^i$. Take $g_1(u)=u\cdot \zeta^i$ and $g_2(u)=u\cdot\zeta^j$, then $g_1g_2(u)=u\cdot \zeta^{i+j}$ yields that there is a group homomorphism $G\to \mathbb{Z}/d\mathbb{Z}$, which is obviously injective. Hence, $G\leqslant \mathbb{Z}/d\mathbb{Z}$. Note that $G\simeq \mathbb{Z}/d\mathbb{Z}$ iff $|G|=d$ iff $[K(u):K]=d$ iff $\mathrm{Irr}(u,K)=d$ iff $x^d-a$ is irreducible.
`\end{proof}`

> [!theorem]
> Use $K,n,\zeta\in K$ as above and suppose $d\mid n$, $\eta=\zeta^{n/d}$. Assume that $\mathrm{char} K=0$. Let $F/K$ be an extension, then TFAE:
> - $F/K$ is cyclic of degree $d$;
> - there exists $a\in K$ such that $x^d-a\in K[x]$ is irreducible, and $F$ is a splitting field of it.
{ #ststez}


`\begin{proof}`
ii)->i) by [[MATH/抽象代数II/Nodes/3.9 Cyclic and Cyclotomic (分圆) Extension#^e267b2\|#^e267b2]].

i)->ii). Write $G=\mathrm{Gal}(F/K)=\left\langle \sigma\right\rangle\simeq \mathbb{Z}/d\mathbb{Z}$. Since $\eta\in K$, we have $N_{F/K}(\eta)=\prod_{g\in G}g(\eta)=\eta^d=1$ and by [[MATH/抽象代数II/Nodes/3.9 Cyclic and Cyclotomic (分圆) Extension#^21b820\|#^21b820]] $\eta=v/\sigma(v)$ for some $v\in F$. It deduces that $\sigma(v)=v\eta^{-1}$ and $\sigma(v^d)=v^d$. Thus, $v^d\in F^G=K$. Let $a=v^d$. We claim that $x^d-a$ is irreducible. Note that $x^d-a$ irreducible iff $x^d-a=\mathrm{Irr}(v,K)$ iff $[K(v):K]=d$ iff $F=K(v)$. Since $\mathrm{Gal}(F/K)$ is abelian, $\mathrm{Gal}(F/K(v))$ is normal and so $K(v)/K$ is a Galois extension. Note that restriction map induces a group homomorphism

$$\mathrm{Gal} (F/K)\to \mathrm{Gal} (K(v)/K),g\mapsto g|_{K(v)}$$

and it is injective by $\sigma(v)=v\cdot\eta^{-1}$ and $\sigma^{i}(v)=v\cdot \eta^{-i}$ for $0\leqslant i\leqslant d-1$. It deduces that $|\mathrm{Gal}(K(v)/K)|\geqslant d$. Hence $|\mathrm{Gal}(K(v)/K)|=d$ and now we finish the proof.
`\end{proof}`


# Cyclotomic Extension

> [!theorem]
> Assume that $\mathrm{char} K=0$. Let $F/K$ be a splitting field of $x^n-1$. We call $F/K$ a cyclostome extension. Then:
> - $F=K(\zeta)$, where $\zeta$ is a primitive $n$-th root of unity;
> - $G=\mathrm{Gal}(F/K)<(\mathbb{Z}/n\mathbb{Z})^\times$;
> - $[F:K]\mid \varphi(n)$ where $\varphi$ is the Euler function. In particular, if $n=p$, then $\mathrm{Gal}(F/K)$ is cyclic of order dividing $p-1$. 
{ #wvxzn0}


`\begin{proof}`
i) is obvious. 

ii) Since $g\in G$ is uniquely determined by $g(\zeta)=\zeta^i$, it induces a group homomorphism $G\stackrel{\theta}{\to} \mathbb{Z}/n\mathbb{Z}$. Then we can easily verify that $\theta(G)\leqslant (\mathbb{Z}/n\mathbb{Z})^{\times}$ and $\theta$ is injective. 

iii) Note that $|(\mathbb{Z}/n\mathbb{Z})^\times|=\varphi(n)$. For $n=p$, $(\mathbb{Z}/p\mathbb{Z})^\times=(\mathbb{F}_p)^\times$ is a cyclic group of order $p-1$.
`\end{proof}`

