---
{"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/MATH/Group theory and applications/Nodes/4.2 Cayley graph: judgement/","dgPassFrontmatter":true}
---


> [!definition]
> Let $G$ be a group and $S\subset G$ be a subset of $G$. Define a graph $\Gamma=(V,E)$ where $V=G$ and $E=\{(x,y)\in G\times G:yx^{-1}\in S\}$. The graph is called *Cayley graph*, denoted as $\mathrm{Cay}(G,S)$.

> [!note] 
> Question: For a given graph $\Gamma$, under what condition $\Gamma$ is a Cayley graph?
> 
> TL;DR: Cayley graph is vertex transitive; a graph is Cayley iff its automorphism group has a vertex regular subgroup.

# Cayley graph is vertex transitive

> [!lemma]
> Cayley graphs are vertex transitive.

`\begin{proof}`
$G\leqslant \mathrm{Aut}(\Gamma)$ acts on vertex set transitively. 
`\end{proof}`


**Remark.** 
- Cayley graph is not necessarily edge transitive, e.g. $C_3\square C_4$. However, maybe most vertex-transitive graphs are Cayley graphs. *(Mackey-Praeger)*
- Conversely, a vertex transitive graph may not a Cayley graph, e.g. Petersen graph.


> [!example]
> Petersen graph is not a Cayley graph.

`\begin{proof}`
Suppose there is a group $G$ and its subset $S$ such that the Petersen graph $\Gamma=\mathrm{Cay}(G,S)$. Then $|G|=10$ and $|S|=3$ yields $G=C_{10}$ or $G=D_{10}$.

Assume $G=C_{10}$. Then $1-a-ab-b-1$ is a circle of length $4$. But in Petersen graph the circle does not exist. Thus $G=D_{10}$.

When $G=D_{10}$, then $|S|$ odd and $\Gamma$ vertex transitive yield $S$ has an involution, i.e. an element whose order is $2$. Then $S$ has a reflection $b$. If $S$ has an element $a$ satisfying $|a|=5$, by $(ab)^2=1$ we still has a circle of length 4: $1-a-ab-aba-1$, contradiction. Otherwise all elements of $S$ are involution, then there is no product of 5 generators equal to identity. But Petersen graph has circles of length 5, contradiction.
`\end{proof}`

# $\mathrm{Aut}\Gamma$ has a vertex regular subgroup

> [!theorem]
> A graph $\Gamma$ is Cayley graph if and only if $\mathrm{Aut}(\Gamma)$ contains a vertex regular subgroup.

`\begin{proof}`
One direction is easy. Now assume $\mathrm{Aut}(\Gamma)$ has a vertex regular subgroup $G$. By $G$ regular on $V$, every vertex can be written as $v=v_0^g$ for a fixed $v_0$ and unique $g\in G$. Then there is a bijection from vertex set to $G$. Define $S=\{g\in G:v_0^g\in\Gamma(v_0)\}$. Then $\Gamma\cong \mathrm{Cay}(G,S)$. 
`\end{proof}`


By the above theorem, it's easy to prove the following corollary:

> [!corollary]
> $\Gamma$ is a Cayley graph of $G$ iff $\mathrm{Aut}\Gamma=G(\mathrm{Aut}\Gamma)_v$ such that $G\cap (\mathrm{Aut}\Gamma)_v=\{id\}$.

