---
{"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/MATH/代数专题/Nodes/2 Maschke Theorem/","dgPassFrontmatter":true}
---


Let $G$ be a group, $k$ a field and $V$ a vector space over $k$. Assume that $V$ is a $G$-module and $\rho:G\to\mathrm{GL}(V)$ is the corresponding representation.

> [!theorem] Maschke theorem
> Let $G$ be a finite group and $\mathrm{char} k\not\mid |G|$. Let $V$ be a $G$-module and $W$ a $G$-submodule. Then there exists a $G$-submodule $W'$ such that $V=W\oplus W'$.

`\begin{proof}`
Consider the subspace $W\subset V$ and $V$ can be decomposed as $V=W\oplus W_0$. We have surjective map $\pi:V\to W,v\to w$. Define

$$\pi_0:V\to W, v\mapsto\frac{1}{|G|}\sum_{g\in G}g\pi(g^{-1}v).$$

Then we have $\pi_0(w)=\frac{1}{|G|}\sum_{g\in G}g(g^{-1}w)=w$ and so $\pi_0$ is surjective. Therefore, $V=W\oplus \ker\pi_0$ as vector space. We now prove that $\ker\pi_0$ is a $G$-submodule. For any $h\in G$ and $v\in\ker\pi_0$, there is $\pi_0(hv)=\frac{1}{|G|}\sum_{g\in G}h(h^{-1}g)\pi(g^{-1}hv)=h\pi_0(v)=0$. Therefore, $\ker\pi_0$ is a $G$-submodule and we finish the proof.
`\end{proof}`

**Remark.** Note that $\pi_0(hv)=h\pi_0(v)$ yields that $\pi_0:V\to W$ is a morphism of $G$-modules.

**Example.** Let $G=\mathbb{Z}$. Define a representation $\rho:G\to\mathrm{GL}(\mathbb{R}^2), a\mapsto \left[ \begin{matrix} 1 & a \\  & 1  \end{matrix} \right]$. Then $G$ is a $\mathbb{R}^2$-module and $V=\{(x,0)\}\subset \mathbb{R}^2$ is a $G$-submodule. Then $W=\{(\alpha y,y):y\neq 0,\alpha\in \mathbb{R}\}$ is also a $G$-submodule and $\mathbb{R}^2=V\oplus W$. 

# Decomposition of Modules

Assume that $G$ is a finite group with any $G$-module $V=V_1^{a_1}\oplus\cdots\oplus V_k^{a_k}$, where $V_i$ is irreducible non-isomorphic modules and $a_i$ are multiplicities. Then by [[MATH/Cards/Nodes/Schur's Lemma\|Schur's lemma]], this decomposition is unique. Yet we can not prove that there is a finite number of irreducible $G$-modules.

**Example.** Let $G$ be an abelian group $G=C_3=\{1,a,a^2\}$. If $\rho:G\to\mathrm{GL}(V)$ is a representation, then $\rho(h)\rho(g)=\rho(g)\rho(h)$ yields that $\rho(g):V\to V$ is a morphism of $G$-modules. If $V$ is irreducible and $k$ is a algebraically closed field, then by [[MATH/Cards/Nodes/Schur's Lemma\|Schur's lemma]] $\rho(g)v=\lambda v$ for some $\lambda\in k$. So any $v\in V$ is an eigenvector and $\rho(g)=\lambda I$. It follows that any subspace in $V$ is $G$-submodule and so $\dim V=1$ by $V$ irreducible. So we get the following proposition.

> [!proposition]
> Any irreducible representation of abelian group is one-dimensional.

- Therefore, if $\rho:C_3\to \mathbb{C}^*$ is a representation, then $\rho(a)\in\{1,\omega,\omega^2\}$ where $\rho$ is a primitive root of unity of degree $3$. 
- It is easy to verify that $\rho_1(a)=\omega$ and $\rho_2(a)=\omega^2$ are non-isomorphic. In fact, we have that $|G|=\sum_i\dim|V_i|^2$. So $\rho_i(a)=\omega^i$ for $i=0,1,2$ are all irreducible $G$-module up to isomorphic.
{ #z4gw1f}


# Representations of $S_3$

In general, in $S_n$ permutation representation $\sigma$ in $k^n$, we have that $\sigma(e_i)=e_{\sigma(i)}$ and $\det(\rho(g))=\pm1$. Note that $\mathrm{sgn}:S_n\to\{1,-1\}\subset C^*,\sigma\mapsto\mathrm{sgn}\sigma$ is a one-dimensional representation. 

For $S_3$ and its permutation representation $\rho:S_3\to\mathrm{GL}(\mathbb{C}^3)$, we have two $S_3$-submodule $W=\{(\alpha,\alpha,\alpha):\alpha\in \mathbb{C}\}\subseteq \mathbb{C}^3$ and $U=\{(\alpha,\beta,\gamma):\alpha+\beta+\gamma=0\}$. Also, another $S_3$-module corresponding the representation $\mathrm{sgn}$ is defined above. Since $6=1^2+1^2+2^2$, all irreducible module of $S_3$ have been listed.

Let $U$ be an irreducible $S_3$-module. Let $\tau=(12)$ and $\sigma=(1 2 3)$. Then $S_3=\left\langle\tau,\sigma\right\rangle$ and $C_3=\{1,\sigma,\sigma^2\}\leqslant S_3$. Then $U$ is also a $C_3$-module. Since $C_3$ is abelian, $U$ can be written as $U=U_{\omega}^{a_1}+U_{\omega^2}^{a_2}+U_{e}^{a_3}$.

If $u$ is a eigenvector of $\sigma$ with eigenvalue $\omega^\alpha$, $\alpha\in\{0,1,2\}$, then $\sigma(\tau(u))=\tau(\sigma^2(u))=\tau(\omega^{2\alpha}u)=\omega^{2\alpha}\tau(u)$, that is, $\tau(u)$ is an eigenvector of $\tau$ with eigenvalue $\omega^{2\alpha}$. If $\omega^\alpha\neq 1$, then $\omega^{2\alpha}\neq 1$. So $u,\tau(u)$ are linearly independent, and $\left\langle u,\tau(u)\right\rangle$ is a $2$-dimensional $S_3$-module. 

For example, we call $2$-dimensional $S_3$-module generated by $x=(\omega,1,\omega^2)$ and $y=(1,\omega,\omega^2)$ *standard representation* of $S_3$.
- $\sigma(x)=\omega x$
- $\sigma y=\omega^2y$
- $\tau(x)=y$
- $\tau(y)=x$

Moreover, $x$ and $y$ is basis of $U=\{(\alpha,\beta,\gamma):\alpha+\beta+\gamma=0\}$. 

> [!definition]
> The group $S_n$ acting on $\mathbb{C}^n$ by permuting basis vectors defines a representation. $U:=\{a_1e_1+\cdots+a_ne_n:a_1+\cdots+a_n=0\}$ is a $S_n$-module, which is called the *standard representation*.

If $v_i$ and $\tau(v_i)$ are linear independent, then $v_i+\tau(v_i)$ are $v_i-\tau(v_i)$ are linear independent. Furthermore, $v_i+\tau(v_i)$ is a trivial representation while $v_i-\tau(v_i)$ is a sign representation. 

If $v_i$ and $\tau(v_i)$ are linear dependent, then $\left\langle v_i,\tau(v_i)\right\rangle$ is one-dimensional. Since $\tau^2(v_i)=v_i$, then $\tau(v_i)=\pm v_i$. If $\tau(v_i)=-v_i$, then $\left\langle v_i\right\rangle$ is sign representation; otherwise $\left\langle v_i\right\rangle$ is trivial. 

Any finite-dimensional representation of $S_3$ is direct sum of trivial, sign and standard. Recall [[MATH/代数专题/Nodes/2 Maschke Theorem#^z4gw1f\|here]]. 