---
{"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/MATH/测度论/Nodes/1 Algebra, sigma-Algebra, Measurable Spaces, limsup/","dgPassFrontmatter":true}
---


> [!definition]
> $X$ is a set, and $\mathcal P(X)$ is the set of all subsets of $X$. $\mathscr A\subseteq \mathcal P(X)$ is an algebra if 
> - $\emptyset,X\in\mathscr A$
> - $A\in\mathscr A$ yields that $A^c\in\mathscr A$
> - if $\{A_i\}_{i=1}^n\subseteq \mathscr A$, then $\cup_{i=1}^n A_i\in \mathscr A$.

> [!definition]
> An algebra $\mathscr A$ is a $\sigma$-algebra if $\mathscr A$ is closed w.r.t. countable union, i.e. if $\{A_i\}_{i=1}^\infty\subseteq\mathscr A$, then $\cup_{i=1}^\infty A_i\in\mathscr A$. $(*)$

**Remark.**
- $(*)$ holds iff $\{A_i\}_{i=1}^\infty\subseteq A$, then $\cap_{i=1}^\infty A_i\in\mathscr A$. 
- If $\mathscr A$ is a $\sigma$-algebra on $X$, $(X,\mathscr A)$ is called a measure space.

**Example.**
- $\mathscr A=\{\emptyset, X\}$, $\mathcal P(X)$ are $\sigma$-algebra on $X$.
- $X$ is an infinite set, then $\mathscr A=\{A\subseteq X:A\mbox{ is finite}\}$ is not an algebra and $\mathscr A'=\{A\subseteq X:A\mbox{ is finite or } A^c \mbox{ is finite}\}$ is an algebra. Moreover, $\mathscr A'$ is not a $\sigma$-algebra (Let $A_i=\{x_{2i+1}\}$ with $\{x_n\}_{n=1}^\infty\subseteq X$. Then $\cup A_i\notin \mathscr A$. ).
- $X$ is uncountable. Let $\mathscr A=\{A\subseteq X:A\mbox{ is countable or } A^c \mbox{ is countable}\}$. Then $\mathscr A$ is a $\sigma$-algebra.

> [!proposition]
> If $\{\mathscr{A}_i\}_{i\in I}$ is a family of algebras ($\sigma$-algebra), then $\cap_{i\in I}\mathscr{A}_i$ is also an algebra ($\sigma$-algebra).

> [!corollary]
> If $\mathcal K\subseteq\mathcal{P}(X)$, the intersection of all algebras ($\sigma$-algebras) containing $\mathcal K$ is the algebra ($\sigma$-algebra) generated by $\mathcal K$.

> [!definition]
>  A *Borel set* is any set in a topological space that can be formed from open sets (or, equivalently, from closed sets) through the operations of countable union, countable intersection, and relative complement.

> [!definition]
> Let $(X,\tau)$ be a topological space. Let $\mathcal{B}(X)$ be the $\sigma$-algebra generated by open subsets of $X$, $\mathcal{B}(X)$ is called the *Borel $\sigma$-algebra* on $X$.

> [!theorem]
> $\mathcal{B}(\mathbb{R})$ is generated by each of the following family of subsets:
> - the collection of closed subsets of $\mathbb{R}$,
> - the collection of the set of the form $(-\infty,a]$,
> - the collection of the set of the form $(a,b]$.
{ #m1q4o8}


`\begin{proof}`
Let $B_1,B_2,B_3$ be the $\sigma$-algebra generated by the collection of subsets in i), ii), iii), respectively. We claim that $\mathcal{B}(\mathbb{R})\supseteq B_1\supseteq B_2\supseteq B_3\supseteq \mathcal{B}(\mathbb{R})$.

Some of them are easy, and we only prove $B_2\supseteq B_3\supseteq \mathcal{B}(\mathbb{R})$. Since $(-\infty,b]\cap(-\infty,a]^c=(a,b]$, we have $B_2\supseteq B_3$. Since $(a,b)=\cup_{n=1}^\infty(a,b-1/n]$, we have $B_3\supseteq \mathcal{B}(\mathbb{R})$.
`\end{proof}`

# limsup and liminf and ...

> [!definition]
> We define
> 
> $$
> \limsup _{n \rightarrow \infty} A_n=\cap_{n=1}^{\infty} \cup_{m=n}^{\infty} A_m, \quad \liminf _{n \rightarrow \infty} A_n=\cup_{n=1}^{\infty} \cap_{m=n}^{\infty} A_m.
> $$
> 

**Remark.** 
- It can be checked that $\limsup _{n \rightarrow \infty} A_n$ (respectively $\left.\liminf _{n \rightarrow \infty} A_n\right)$ consists of those elements of $X$ that belong to infinitely many $A_n$ (respectively that belong to all but finitely many $A_n$ ).
- Recall that $\lim\sup a_n=\inf_n\sup_{m\geqslant n} a_m$, and they are similar.

> [!proposition]
> $\mathcal{B}(\mathbb{R}^n)$ is generated by each of the collection of sets:
> - all closed subsets of $\mathbb{R}^n$,
> - sets of the form $\{(x_1,\cdots,x_n):x_i\leqslant b_i, i=1,\cdots,n,b_i\in \mathbb{R}\}$,
> - set of the form $\{(x_1,\cdots,x_n):a_i<x_i\leqslant b_i,a_i,b_i\in \mathbb{R}\}$.

`\begin{proof}`
It is similar to the case of [[MATH/测度论/Nodes/1 Algebra, sigma-Algebra, Measurable Spaces, limsup#^m1q4o8\|$B(\mathbb{R})$]]. 
`\end{proof}`

> [!definition]
> A $F_\sigma$-set is a countable union of closed sets. 
> 
> A $G_\delta$-set is a countable intersection of open sets.
