---
{"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/MATH/Lie group and Lie algebra/Nodes/1 Introduction/","dgPassFrontmatter":true}
---

# What is a Lie Algebra?

Lie algebra is a vector space with a special operator: bracket operator, which is a non-commutative multiplication.

> [!definition]
> Suppose $K$ is a field with $\mathrm{char}K=0$. A Lie algebra over $K$ is a $K$-vector space $g$ together with a bracket operation 
> 
> $$\begin{aligned}\left[\space,\space\right]:g\times g&\to g,\\(X,Y)&\mapsto[X,Y]\end{aligned}$$
> 
> satisfying the following properties:
> - $[Y,X]=-[X,Y]$
> - *(Jacobi identity)* $[X,[Y,Z]]+[Y,[Z,X]]+[Z,[X,Y]]=0$.

Conversely, if $\mathscr{A}$ is a associative algebra over a field $K$, then the operation $[X,Y]=XY-YX$ turns $\mathscr A$ into a Lie algebra.Note that the bracket is trivial when $\mathscr A$ is Abel, we can say it describe where the abelianization fails.

# Some Trivial Definitions

> [!definition] homomorphism
> For two Lie algebras $g_1,g_2$, a homomorphism $\rho:g_1\to g_2$ is a $k$-linear map satisfying $\rho([X,Y])=[\rho(X),\rho(Y)]$. 

**Remark.** Note that an algebra does not always have multiplication. So homomorphism does NOT always preserve multiplication. For example, consider the adjoint representation.

> [!definition] ideal
> An ideal of a Lie algebra $g$ is a subset $I\subseteq g$ such that $[X,Y]\in I$ for any $X\in I,Y\in g$. 

> [!definition] Lie subalgebra
> $h\subseteq g$ is a Lie subalgebra if $h$ is closed under the bracket operation.

> [!definition] quotient
> In $g/I$, define $[\overline X,\overline Y]:=\overline{[X,Y]}$. Note that $g\mapsto g/I$ is a Lie algebra homomorphism.

> [!definition] representation
> A $K$-linear representation of a Lie algebra $g$ is a $K$-vector space $V$ together with a Lie algebra homomorphism:
> 
> $$\rho:g\to\mathrm{End}(V).$$

For example, 

$$\begin{aligned}\mathrm{ad}:g&\to\mathrm{End}(g),\\x&\mapsto\mathrm{ad}X:Y\mapsto [X,Y]\end{aligned}$$

is a Lie algebra representation.

> [!definition] indecomposable
>  $\rho$ is called *indecomposable* if $V$ can not be written as the direct sum of two proper invariant subspaces.
{ #410e45}


> [!definition] irreducible
>  $\rho$ is called *irreducible* if it doesn't admit non-trivial invariant subspaces.

# Abelian, Solvable and Nilpotent

> [!definition] abelian, solvable, nilpotent
> Suppose $g$ is a Lie algebra over $K$.
>- It is *abelian* if $[\cdot,\cdot]=0$.
>- It is *solvable* if 
>
> $$\begin{aligned}g^{(0)}&=g, g^{(1)}=[g,g]=\{[X,Y]:X,Y\in g\},\cdots,\\g^{(n)}&:=[g^{(n-1)},g^{(n-1)}]=0.\end{aligned}$$
> 
>- It is called *nilpotent* if the following series descend to zero $g^1=g,g^2=[g,g],\cdots,g^n=[g,g^{n-1}]$.

## Some Examples

For example, 

$$B_n(K)=\big\{ \left[\begin{matrix} * & * & * \\  & \ddots & * \\ 0 &  & * \end{matrix} \right] \big\}$$

is solvable, and

$$N_n(K)=\big\{ \left[\begin{matrix} 0 & * & * \\  & \ddots & * \\ 0 &  & 0 \end{matrix} \right] \big\}$$

is nilpotent.

# Semi-simple: Defined by Representations

> [!definition] semi-simple
> Suppose $g$ is a finite dimensional Lie algebra over $\mathbb C$ and $(\rho,V)$ is a finite dimensional representation of $g$ over $\mathbb C$. Then:
> - $\rho$ is called *completely reducible* if for any $g$-invariant subspace $U$ of $V$, there exists a $g$-invariant subspace $U'$ such that $V=U\oplus U'$. 
> - If a finite dimensional Lie algebra over $\mathbb C$ with the property that every finite dimensional representation of $g$ over $\mathbb C$ is completely reducible, such a Lie algebra is called *semi-simple*.
{ #29de28}


Note that there exists non-completely-reducible representation:

Define $L= \left[\begin{matrix} \lambda & 1 & 0 \\ & \lambda & 1 \\ & & \lambda \end{matrix} \right]$. Then any representation generated by $L$ is not completely reducible.

**Remark.** 
- There is another definition of semi-simple, that is, the direct sum of finitely many non-trivial finite dimensional simple Lie algebra. See [[MATH/Lie group and Lie algebra/Nodes/3 The Killing form - describe solvable and semi-simple#^c4f085\|here]].
- Non-completely-reducible representation roughly comes from the solvable property, as $g$ semi-simple iff $\mathrm{rad}g=0$, where $\mathrm{rad}g$ is the maximal solvable ideal. In addition, representation of solvable parts can be written as upper triangular matrix, and "upper triangular matrix" is roughly non-completely-reducible, as the above example shows.

# $\lambda$-weight Space and Generalized $\lambda$-weight Space

> [!definition] weight
> Suppose $g$ is a finite dimensional Lie algebra over $\mathbb C$ and $\rho:g\to\mathrm{End}(V)$ is a finite dimensional complex representation. For a $1$-dimensional representation $\lambda:g\to\mathbb C$, the $\lambda$-weight space is defined to be 
> 
> $$V_\lambda=\{v\in V:\rho(x)v=\lambda(x)v,\forall x\in g\}.$$
> 
> When $V_\lambda\neq 0$, we call $\lambda$ a *weight* of $\rho$ and $V_\lambda$ the according *weight space*.

> [!lemma]
> [[MATH/Lie group and Lie algebra/Nodes/2.1 Existence of (generalized) weight space#^bc994b\|Since]] any representation of a solvable Lie algebra has a weight, we have the following properties:
> - One dimensional representations of a finite dimensional Lie algebra $g$ are just linear maps $g\to\mathbb C$ that vanish on $[g,g]$. Hence, when $[g,g]\subsetneq g$ is solvable, $g$ has an non-trivial $1$-dimension representation.  
> - If $g$ is a finite dimensional solvable Lie algebra over $\mathbb C$, then every finite dimensional representation of $G$ over $\mathbb C$ has a $1$-dim sub-representation.  

> [!definition] generalized weight
> Then generalized $\lambda$-weight is defined to be 
> 
> $$\widetilde V_\lambda=\{v\in V:(\rho(X)-\lambda(X))^{n_{x,v}}v=0\}$$
> 
> where $n_{x,v}$ depends on $X$ and $V$.