---
{"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/MATH/Lie group and Lie algebra/Nodes/2.2 Engel's theorem/","dgPassFrontmatter":true}
---


> [!theorem] Engel's theorem
> Let $g$ be a finite dimensional complex Lie algebra. Then $g$ is nilpotent $\iff$ $\mathrm{ad}X$ is nilpotent for each $X\in g$.
{ #e1bcc4}


`\begin{proof}`i) Suppose $g$ is nilpotent. Then there is a $n$ such that $g^n=[g,[g,[\cdots,[g,g]]\cdots,]=0$. So for any $X_i\in g$, $\mathrm{ad}X_1\cdots\mathrm{ad}X_n=0$ and $(\mathrm{ad}X)^n=0$ for any $X\in g$.

ii) Conversely, suppose $\mathrm{ad}X$ is nilpotent for each $X\in g$. Claim: if $h\subsetneq g$ is a nilpotent Lie subalgebra, then there is a $x\in g\backslash h$ such that $\tilde h=h\oplus \mathbb CX$ is a nilpotent Lie subalgebra. Obviously, for any non-zero $X_1\in g$, $\mathbb CX_1$ is a nilpotent Lie algebra. Then using the above claim, we can progressively get a nilpotent subalgebra sequence $h_1\subset h_2\subset\cdots\subset h_n$ until $h_n=g$. Now we prove the claim.

By the assumption of $\mathrm{ad}X$ nilpotent, the action $h\curvearrowright g$ (induced by adjoint representation) has only one generalized weight space, the one associated to the trivial weight. So the quotient action $h\curvearrowright g/h$ has one generalized weight space, the one associated to the trivial weight. [[附件/More explanations#^4d696a\|Thus]] there exists non-zero $\widetilde X\in g/h$ such that $\widetilde{\mathrm{ad}}(h)(\widetilde X)=0$, i.e. $[h,X]\subset h$ where $X+h=\tilde X$. So $\widetilde h=h\oplus\mathbb CX$ is a subalgebra. Now we further argue that $\widetilde h$ is nilpotent. Note that 

$$\begin{aligned}&[\widetilde h,\widetilde h]=[h+\mathbb CX,h+\mathbb CX]\subseteq h\\
&[\widetilde h,h]=[h+\mathbb CX,h]\subseteq [h,h]+\mathbb C\cdot\mathrm{ad}X(h)\\
&[\widetilde h,[\widetilde h,[\widetilde h,\widetilde h]]]\subseteq [h,h]+\mathbb C\cdot(\mathrm{ad}X)^2(h)\\
&\cdots\\
&\text{so there is a $j$ s.t. $\widetilde h^j\subseteq h^2$ by $X$ nilpotent.}
\end{aligned}\tag{*}$$

Claim: for each $i$, there is a $e(i)$ s.t. $\widetilde h^{e(i)}\subseteq h^i$. Show it by induction. By $(*)$ the case $k=1$ is true. Suppose $k=i$ is true, that is $\widetilde h^{e(i)}\subseteq h^i$. Then

$$\begin{aligned}
&\widetilde h^{e(i)+1}=[\widetilde h^{e(i)},\widetilde h]\subseteq[h^i,h+\mathbb CX]\subseteq h^{i+1}+\mathrm{ad}X(h^i)\\
&\widetilde h^{e(i)+2}=[\widetilde h^{e(i)+1},\widetilde h]\subseteq [h^{i+1}+\mathrm{ad}X(h^i),h+\mathbb CX]. 
\end{aligned}$$

By induction we can prove that $[X,h^i]\subseteq h^i$ for $i\in \mathbb{N}$. Then there is

$$\begin{aligned}
&[h^{i+1}+\mathrm{ad}X(h^i),h+\mathbb CX]\\
\subseteq&[h^{i+1},h]+\mathbb C[h^{i+1},X]+[\mathrm{ad}X(h^i),h]+\mathbb C[\mathrm{ad}X(h^i),X]\\
\subseteq& h^{i+1}+\mathbb C[h^{i+1},X]+([X,[h^i,h]]+[h^i,[h,x]])+\mathbb C\cdot(\mathrm{ad}X)^2(h^i)\\
\subseteq& h^{i+1}+\mathbb C\cdot(\mathrm{ad}X)^2(h^i).
\end{aligned}$$

Similarly, there is a big enough $j$ such that $(\mathrm{ad}X)^j=0$ and then

$$\widetilde h^{e(i)+j}\subseteq h^{i+1}+\mathbb C\cdot(\mathrm{ad}X)^j(h^i)=h^{i+1}.$$

By induction hypothesis, the claim is proved and so $\widetilde h$ is nilpotent.
`\end{proof}`