---
{"dg-publish":true,"aliases":["Frattini subgroup"],"permalink":"/MATH/Cards/Nodes/Frattini Subgroup/","dgPassFrontmatter":true}
---


> [!definition]
> Let $G$ be a finite group. The *Frattini subgroup* of $G$, denoted by $\Phi(G)$, is the intersection of all maximal subgroups of $G$. 
> 
> For the case that $G$ has no maximal subgroups, it is defined by $\Phi(G)=G$.

It is easy to prove that $\Phi(G)$ is a [[MATH/Cards/Nodes/Characteristic Subgroup\|characteristic subgroup]]. Moreover, some properties are given as follows.

# Set of Nongenerators

> [!definition]
> An element $x\in G$ is called a *non-generator* if $\left\langle x,S\right\rangle=G$, then $\left\langle S\right\rangle=G$ for any $S\subseteq G$.

**Examples.** 
- Let $G=C_{p^2}$. Then for any $a\in G$, $a^p$ is a non-generator.
- $Q_8$ has non-generator s of order $1$ or $2$.
- The set of non-generators of $D_{2n}$ is $\{a^m,a^mb:(m,n)\neq 1\}$.
- Each non-identity element of a non-abelian simple group is not a non-generator element. In fact, each non-abelian simple group can be generated by "1.5" elements. That is, for a non-abelian simple group $G$ and any $1\neq g\in G$, there exists a $h\in G$ such that $G=\left\langle g,h\right\rangle$.

> [!theorem]
> $\Phi(G)$ is the set of non-generators of $G$. 
{ #7vww3g}


`\begin{proof}`
Define $X$ as the set of all non-generators of $G$. For any $x\in X$ and any maximal subgroup $M$, $\langle M,x\rangle=\langle M\rangle$ yields $x\in M$. Thus $X\subseteq M$ for any $M$ and so $X\subseteq\Phi(G)$. 

Conversely, assume that there exists a $g\in\Phi(G)\setminus X$. Then there is a subset $S$ such that $\langle S\rangle< G$ and $\langle S,g\rangle=G$. Let $H=\langle S\rangle$. If $H$ is not a maximal subgroup, there is a maximal subgroup $K$ with $H< K< G$. Since $g\in\Phi(G)\leqslant K$, we have $K\geqslant\langle H,g\rangle=G$, which is impossible. Hence, $H$ is a maximal subgroup and so $g\in H$. Then $\langle H,g\rangle=H\neq G$, which is a contradiction. Therefore, we have $X\supseteq\Phi(G)$.
`\end{proof}`

> [!proposition]
> If $N\lhd G$, then $\Phi(N)\leqslant\Phi(G)$.

`\begin{proof}`
Since $\Phi(N)\lhd_{\mathrm{char}}N$, we have that $\Phi(N)\lhd G$. It suffices to show that for any maximal subgroup $M<G$, there is $M\geqslant \Phi(N)$. Otherwise, if there exists a maximal subgroup $M$ such that $\Phi(N)\not\subseteq M$, then $\left\langle M,\Phi(N)\right\rangle=M\Phi(N)=G$. Note that 

$$G/N\cong M\Phi(N)N/N\cong M\Phi(N)\big/(M\cap N)\Phi(N)\cong G/(M\cap N)\Phi(N).$$

As $N\geqslant (M\cap N)\Phi(N)$, it yields that $N=(M\cap N)\Phi(N)$ and so $N=\left\langle M\cap N,\Phi(N)\right\rangle=M\cap N$, contradiction. 
`\end{proof}`

# Nilpotent Subgroups

> [!theorem] Gaschutz
> Let $D,N\lhd G$ such that $D\leqslant \Phi(G)\cap N$. Then $N/D$ is nilpotent iff $N$ is nilpotent.
{ #124c42}


`\begin{proof}`
Assume that $N/D$ is nilpotent. Let $P$ be a Sylow $p$-subgroup of $N$. Then $PD/D$ is a Sylow $p$-subgroup of $N/D$, and 

$$PD/D\lhd_{\mathrm{char}} N/D\lhd G/D.$$

Hence, $PD/D\lhd G/D$ and $PD\lhd G$. It follows that $PD\lhd N$. By [[MATH/Cards/Nodes/Frattini's Argument\|Frattini's argument]], we have $N=PDN_N(P)=PN_N(P)=N_N(P)$, so $P\lhd N$. [[MATH/Cards/Nodes/Nilpotent Group#^9gfd7n\|Therefore]], $N$ is nilpotent.
`\end{proof}`

> [!corollary]
> - $\Phi(G)$ is nilpotent.
> - $G$ is nilpotent iff $G/\Phi(G)$ is nilpotent.
> - *(Wielandt)* $G$ is nilpotent iff $G'\leqslant\Phi(G)$.
{ #395831}


`\begin{proof}`
(i) Taking $N=D=\Phi(G)$. Then by [[MATH/Cards/Nodes/Frattini Subgroup#^124c42\|#^124c42]] $N$ is nilpotent.

(ii) Let $N=G$ and $D=\Phi(G)$. Then $N/D=G/\Phi(G)$ is nilpotent iff $N=G$ is nilpotent, by [[MATH/Cards/Nodes/Frattini Subgroup#^124c42\|#^124c42]].

(iii) Suppose $G$ is nilpotent. Let $M$ be the maximal subgroup of $G$. Then $M\lhd G$ and $G/M\cong \mathbb{Z}_p$ is abelian. Thus $M\geqslant G'$. By the arbitrary of $M$, we have that $G'\leqslant\Phi(G)$. Conversely, assume that $G'\leqslant\Phi(G)$. Then $G/\Phi(G)$ is abelian and so is nilpotent. Then by (ii), $G$ is nilpotent.
`\end{proof}`

# Exactly Elementary Abelian

> [!theorem]
> If G is a finite $p$-group, then $\Phi(G)$ is the smallest normal subgroup such that its quotient is elementary abelian. Moreover, if the quotient group $G/\Phi(G)$ has order $p^k$, then $k$ is the smallest number of generators for $G$.
{ #k9gxk1}


`\begin{proof}`
Since $G$ is a $p$-group, then $G$ is nilpotent. Thus $\Phi(G)\geqslant G'$ by [[MATH/Cards/Nodes/Frattini Subgroup#^395831\|#^395831]] (iii), and so $G/\Phi(G)$ is abelian. If there is a $\overline g\in G/\Phi(G)$ with $|\overline g|$ is not a prime, then $\overline g^a$ is a non-generator with $|\overline g|=ab$, which contradicts with [[MATH/Cards/Nodes/Frattini Subgroup#^7vww3g\|#^7vww3g]]. Therefore, $G/\Phi(G)$ is elementary abelian.

Assume that $N\lhd G$ is a normal subgroup of $G$ and $G/N$ is elementary abelian. It remains to show $N\geqslant\Phi(G)$. Suppose that $G/N=\left\langle\overline{g_1}\right\rangle\times \cdots\times\left\langle\overline{g_m}\right\rangle\cong \mathbb{Z}_p^m$. For any preimage $g_i\in G$ of $\overline{g_i}$, $g_i$ is not a non-generator of $G$ because $\left\langle g_1,\cdots,g_m,N\right\rangle=G$ and $\left\langle g_1,\cdots,\check g_i,\cdots,g_m,N\right\rangle\neq G$. Therefore, if $g\in G\setminus N$, then $g$ is not a non-generator and so $N\geqslant\Phi(G)$. 

For the "moreover" part, since $G/\Phi(G)\cong \mathbb{Z}_p^k$ for some $k$, it can be seen as a linear space and it has a basis $\{\overline e_1,\cdots,\overline e_k\}$. Let $\{e_1,\cdots,e_k\}$ be a set of preimage of $G\to G/\Phi(G)$. Then $\left\langle e_1,\cdots,e_k,\Phi(G)\right\rangle=G$ and so $\left\langle e_1,\cdots,e_k\right\rangle =G$ by [[MATH/Cards/Nodes/Frattini Subgroup#^7vww3g\|#^7vww3g]]. 
`\end{proof}`


**Remark.** It is similar as [[MATH/交换代数/Nodes/2 Modules#^w0idub\|Nakayama lemma]]. 

# Preserved by Direct Product

> [!proposition]
> If H and K are finite groups, then $\Phi(H\times K)=\Phi(H)\times\Phi(K)$.

`\begin{proof}`
If $H_0$ and $K_0$ are maximal subgroups of $H$ and $K$, respectively, then $H_0\times K$ and $H\times K_0$ are maximal subgroups of $H\times K$ and so $H_0\times K_0\subseteq (H_0\times K)\cap(H\times K_0)$. Therefore, we have $\Phi(H)\times \Phi(K)\subseteq\Phi(H\times K)$. 

Conversely, suppose that $L$ is a maximal subgroup of $H\times K$. Define $\pi_1:H\times K\to H$ and $\pi_2:H\times K\to K$ be the canonical quotient maps. For any $h\in H\setminus\pi_1(H)$, we have $(h,1)\notin H\times K$ and so $\left\langle L,(h,1)\right\rangle=H\times K$. Therefore, $L_H:=\pi_1(L)$ is a maximal subgroup of $H$. Similarly, $L_K:=\pi_2(L)$ is a maximal subgroup of $K$. Then we have $\Phi(H)\times \Phi(K)\supseteq\Phi(H\times K)$. Now we finish the proof.
`\end{proof}`